The Islandman
TOMAS O'CROHAN

By
THE ISLANDMAN
THE ISLANDMAN

TOMAS O’CROHAN

TRANSLATED FROM THE IRISH
BY

ROBIN FLOWER

OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

FOREWORD
 
The Blasket Islands are three miles off Ireland’s Dingle Penin-
sula. Until their evacuation just after the Second World War, the
lives of the 150 or so Blasket Islanders had remained unchanged
for centurics. A rich oral tradition of story-telling, poetry, and
folktales kept alive the legends and history of the islands, and has
made their literature famous throughout the world. The seven
Blasket Island books published by Oxford University Press
contain memoirs and reminiscences from within this literary
tradition, evoking a way of life which has now vanished.




The book here translated was first published in 1929, and
had an immediate success among readers of Irish. It was
the first attempt by a peasant of the old school, practically
uneducated in the modern sense, though highly trained in
the tradition of an ancient folk culture, to set out the way
of his life upon his remote island from childhood to old age.
This attempt had an interest of its own, but the fascina-
tion of the result was greatly enhanced by the unique in-
dividuality of the writer, who, though sharing to the full in
the character and interests of the community in which he
grew up, was peculiarly adapted by the whole bent of his
mind to act as an observer as well as a vigorous participant
in all the events of his isolated world. That little world—
the island group of the Blaskets lying off the extreme point
of the peninsula of Corcaguiney in West Kerry—he no-
where attempts to describe. And it may be of use to the
reader unacquainted with that part of Ireland to have
before him some brief account of the natural environment
of the life depicted in this book. The peninsula of Cor-
caguiney runs out west into the Atlantic between the two
bays of Dingle and Tralee. It is a wild world of inter-
tangled mountains, culminating in the great mass of Bran-
don, beyond Dingle. West of Mount Brandon again two
hills, the pointed shape of Croaghmartin and the long body
of Mount Eagle, divide the two parishes of Ventry and
Dunquin, and beyond Dunquin, to the north, lies the
parish of Ballyferriter. In the old days the approach to
Dunquin, to which parish the Blaskets belong, was by the
hill pass that climbs between these two summits. But in
the days of the great famine a relief road was constructed
round the promontory of Slea Head under Mount Eagle,
and the heavier traffic now takes that way. Going by the

old road, you see below you, as you top the pass, the
parish of Dunquin, and, out in the sea beyond, the six
main islands of the group. Nearest to the land lies Beginish
——a small flat island of good grass. A mile to the west is the
Great Blasket—a high, narrow island, three miles by one,
with a little cluster of houses on its eastern front towards
the mainland, perched on the cliff above the tiny harbour
and the long beach of sand called An Traigh Bhan, the
White Strand. Beyond the White Strand to the north there
is a cliff-ringed beach of shingle known as the Gravel
Strand, on which boats may be pulled up. Here the island
sheep are driven for shearing, and on the rocks, out from
the beach, weed is gathered for manure. The adventure
of the women in Chapter 2 happened here, and here
Tomas had his encounter with the seal (Chapter g). The
island rises westward in a series of hills on which the cattle
and sheep find scant pasturage and rabbits burrow in the
lofty cliffs. The best turf in the island is on its summit,
on the hill called Sliabh an Duna, beyond the prehistoric
cliff fort which gives its name to the height, and a rough
road leads some way back along the island in that direction.
Above the road is an old martello tower, dating from the
French wars, which stood unimpaired until a few years
ago, when a thunderbolt shattered it, At the end of the
island the hill falls away into a grassy expanse, slanting
to the south, where was an ancient settlement, of which
only fragments of beehive dwellings now remain. Beyond
this again the land narrows, and you climb over jagged
rocks to Ceann Dubh, Black Head, the extreme western
point of the island. A narrow strait separates Ceann Dubh
from Inish na Bro, Quern Island, and a little farther off lies
Inishvickillaun, where is an ancient church and a little
modern house, now only intermittently inhabited. The
caves of Geann Dubh and Inishvickillaun are haunted
by seals, and Inish na Bro and Inishvickillaun teem with


rabbits. Farther out to the west is the Teeraught, the
Western Island, a high pinnacle of rock carrying a light-
house, the last light that Irish emigrants see on their
voyage to America. North of the main island is Inish
Tooshkert, the Northern Island, a fastness of cliffs, in
which is a well-preserved ancient oratory.

These islands and the seas about them are the theatre of
the events described in this book. They are inhabited by
a small population of fishermen of comparatively recent
mainland origin, who support themselves precariously by
fishing and on the produce of their fields and flocks. Their
church is in Dunquin, their market-town is Dingle, and
few of the older inhabitants have ever ventured farther
east than Tralee. They are all Irish speakers, and, though
English is taught in the little school, it has made no way in
the common intercourse of the island. The older inhabi-
tants have a rich store of folk-tale and folk-song, and in the
period described in this book the little community was a
typical example of an Irish village of the old fashion,
practically untouched by modern influences. The great
value of this book is that it is a description of this vanishing
mode of life by one who has known no other, and tells his
tale with perfect frankness, serving no theory and aiming
at no literary effect, but solely concerned to preserve some
image of the world that he has known, or, in his own
words, ‘to set down the character of the people about me
so that some record of us might live after us, for the like of
us will never be again’.

For the purposes of such a record Tomas was admirably
fitted by a long and unconscious preparation. It will be
clear to every reader that from his earliest days he was
keenly observant, watching and judging the people about
him, eagerly alive to their tricks of character, and appre-
ciating to the full the humours and tragedies of their life.
He has always been a handy man, meeting with ready

expedients every call on sea or land and scornfully critical
of the left-handed blunderings of the less expert among his
fellows. Life on such an island, where there are no shops
and no craftsmen at call, develops an all-round compe-
tence in the individual to which our specialized civiliza-
tions afford no parallel. The experience of these islanders
is necessarily narrow in its range, but within that range it
is absolute and complete. At sea and on the hill, in the
house, in the field, or on the strand, they must at all times
be prepared for every event. There is always a narrow
margin between them and famine or violent death, and
their faculties are the keener for that. All this necessary
equipment of an islandman is raised to a higher power in
Tomas by a natural critical faculty. He has always reflected
on his experience and watched his fellows with a certain
aloofness. A not unfriendly irony distinguishes his conver-
sation and gives a sharp flavour to many of the pictures in
his book. He has an inborn sense of decency and restraint,
and in the wild scenes of carousal, which are the inevitable
relief demanded by the monotonous and restricted life of a
community imprisoned by the sea, he will be seen observ-
ing a quiet moderation and watching lest his more reckless
companions come to any harm.

This critical alertness is very noticeable in his use of his
native language. Those who, like myself, have had the
privilege of his friendship and instruction have often
wondered at the neatness and precision of his explanations
of the meaning of words and phrases, his ready produc-
tion of synonyms and parallels out of a vast vocabulary,
the finish and certainty of his phrasing in Ordinary con-
versation.

There has always been a strong literary tradition among
the Munster peasantry. They have preserved orally a con-
siderable corpus both of folk-song and of the more elabo-
rate poetry of the eighteenth century. And their folk-tales


are related by the best exponents in a fascinating idiom
which has a natural quality of literature. All this tradition
Tomas inherits from the poets and taletellers with whom he
consorted eagerly in his young days. The island poet may
have made him suffer, but he taught him much. And his
own inborn genius for speech has refined his acquire-
ments into an individual style. He has told me that, in
writing this book, he aimed at a simple style, intelligible to
every reader of Irish, using none of the ‘cruadh-Ghaoluinn’,
the ‘cramp-Irish’ of the pure literary tradition. This aim
he has achieved. For the narrative runs easily in the or-
dinary language of the island, with only an occasional
literary allusion of a straightforward kind. But the style
is none the less unmistakably his own, and to those who
have known the man his whole figure and character is im-
plicit in the manner of his writing.

If I may speak for myself, the reading of this book
brought vividly to my mind my earliest experience of the
author, when he was in his strength, over twenty years ago.
He was in those days a small, lively man, with a sharp, in-
telligent face, weathered and wrinkled by the sun and rain
and the flying salt of the sea, out of which two bright,
observant eyes looked critically upon the world. He was
then hard at work, fishing and helping to build houses
for the Congested Districts Board, but he spared the time
to help me with my studies. Lying under the lee of a
turf-rick, or sitting in his own house or the King’s kitchen,
he would pour out tales and poetry and proverbs, quicken-
ing the whole with lively comments and precise explana-
tions of difficult words and interspersing memories of his
own life and of the island past. If this experience had been
forgettable, this book, which gives so vivid a picture of the
man, would have brought it back to me. And I can only
hope that my attempt at translation does not fail too hope-
lessly to convey this double image.

For the method adopted in this translation a word of
excuse may be offered. Irish and English are so widely
separated in their mode of expression that nothing like a
literal rendering from the one language to the other is
possible. It is true that there has come into being a literary
dialect, sometimes used for translation from Irish or for the
purpose of giving the effect of Irish speech, which in books
or on the stage has met with considerable applause. And in
skilful hands this mixture of Irish and English idioms has
often an effect of great charm. It does not to my ear, how-
ever, convey the character of the language as naturally
spoken by those to whom it is their only speech. There is
always something slightly artificial about it, and often a
suggestion of the pseudo-poetic. This literary dialect could
not be used to render the forthright, colloquial simplicity
of the original of this book. For the same reason the more
sophisticated forms of literary English are also excluded.
It seemed best therefore to adopt a plain, straightforward
style, aiming at the language of ordinary men who narrate
the common experiences of their life frankly and without
any cultivated mannerism. The constant charm of Irish
idiom, which is so delightful in the original, must neces-
sarily be lost. But rouge is no substitute for a natural com-
plexion.

A few words may be added on the genesis of the original
book. It would probably never have occurred to Tomas to
write his life, had it not been for Mr. Brian O’Kelly of
Killarney, who encouraged him to set about the work,
and read over part of Maxim Gorki’s autobiography to
him to show the interest of that kind of writing. The
book was written in a series of letters to Mr. O’Kelly.
This accounted for the bulk of the matter. These letters
Mr. O’Kelly handed over to Mr. Sugrue, who, under the
name of ‘An Seabhac’, has published a series of delightful
tales in the language of West Kerry. Tomas then wrote


the remaining part of the book, and it was published
under Mr. Sugrue’s editorship, and in the Irish form
met with immediate success. My own thanks are due to
Mr. Sugrue, who has been kind enough to read over this
translation. The photographs by Mr. Thomas H. Mason
of Dublin are reproduced by his kind permission,

ROBIN FLOWER
CONTENTS

. My Childhood

. My Schooldays

. Our Houses

. In School and Out

. My First Visit to Dingle

. Bald Tom and the Old Days
. My Last School

. Marriage

. Gathering Seaweed

Time Passes

. My Manhood

. The Day of the Seal Hunt
. A Wife Proposed for Me
. Christmas Provisions

. A Merry Christmas

. Shrovetide, 1878

. Work and Wandering

. An End to Boats and Middlemen
. The Litile Canoe

The Troubles of Life

The Yellow Meal

The Wake

I begin to take an Interest in Irish
This and That

The End

****Plates****

Island kitchen facing page 49
The lower village, the White Strand, and the Rocks
of the Road 80

Houses of the lower village with Beginish beyond

The harbour | 113

Transporting a cow to the mainland

Author (right) and translator 144

Felt-roofed island house

School-children

Approaching the island from the mainland | v7

Gathering furze on the hill 208

Going up the hill for turf

Western end of the island, Inish na Bré and Inish-
vickillaun in the distance 224

Above the Gravel Strand, looking towards Sybil Head |
i
ue aGortadod.



THE BLASKET ISLANDS
1. My Childhood

MY PEOPLE: THE OLD WOMAN NEXT DOOR: THE

TURF BASKET~ THE PALM-OIL +MY BREECHES-:

THE PORPOISES: THE WHEAT SHIP - MYSELF AND
THE CONGER-EEL

I was born on St. Thomas’s day in the year 1856. I can
recall being at my mother’s breast, for I was four years old
before I was weaned. I am ‘the scrapings of the pot’, the
last of the litter. That’s why I was left so long at the breasts.
I was a spoilt child, too.

Four sisters I had, and every one of them putting her
own titbit into my mouth. They treated me like a young
bird in the nest. Maura Donel, Kate Donel, Eileen Donel,
and Nora Donel—those were their names. My brother was
Pats Donel, and I am Tomas Donel. Maura is living still in
this island, two of them are still alive in America, and Pats
isn’t dead yet. Kate died after drawing the old-age pension
for three months, That was the whole bunch of us. They
were all well grown when I was a baby, so that it was little
wonder that I was spoilt among them all. Nobody expected
me at all when I came their way.

My father was a middle-sized man, stout and strong.
My mother was a flourishing woman, as tall as a peeler,
strong, vigorous, and lively, with bright, shining hair. But
when I was at the breast there was little strength in her
milk, and besides that I was ‘an old cow’s calf’, not easy to
‘rear. For all that, the rascal death carried off many a fine
young ruffian and left me to the last. I suppose he didn’t
think it worth his while to shift me. I was growing stronger
all the time and going my own way wherever I wanted,
only that they kept an eye on me to see that I didn’t go


by the sea. I wore a petticoat of undressed wool, and a
knitted cap. And the food I got was hens’ eggs, lumps of
butter, and bits of fish, limpets, and winkles—a bit of
everything going from sea or land.

We lived in a cramped little house, roofed with rushes
from the hill. Often the hens would nest in the thatch and
lay a dozen eggs there. We had a post bed in the corner, and
two beds at the bottom of the house. There used to be two
cows in the house, the hens and their eggs, an ass, and the
rest of us. Our house was reversed: that is, its door faced
north—all the others were turned to the south.

There was another house opposite with its door towards
us, and the two families chattered together every day. The
woman from that house was in and out of our house all day
long. She always had something as a result of her visits.
She was a little, undersized, untidy-haired babbler with a
sallow face, not much to look at—a gossip, always hither
and thither. She was always saying to my mother that all
Ireland couldn’t rear an old cow’s calf, and I don’t think
any cow, old or young, ever had a more wretched-looking
calf than herself, But all the same, she had a good heart.

I was soon sprouting finely, and the grey petticoat was
getting too short for me. I was coming to know things then.
I took the measure of the old girl opposite pretty soon, and
gave her tit for tat. The two families used to be in our house
every Sunday when my father said the Rosary. The woman
from the house across the way used to say to my mother
every Sunday: ‘You'll leave the grey petticoat on him till
you’re looking for a wife for him, Isn’t he growing at a rate,
God bless him!’, so she would say, with a great lump of a
bream safe in her stomach.

My father’s kin were from Dunquin. He married into
the Island. My mother’s people were from Ventry. They
were both willing to take one another. They hadn’t the
way that some couples have that makes you want to take a


stick to them to make them marry! They settled down in a
little cabin to live on the produce of the sea, and they had
a bit of land, too; and both of them were well gifted to
make the best profit out of sea and land. There were no
asses in the Island in those days, only a creel on the back of
every man—and of every woman, too—that is to say, every
woman that wasn’t a pet or a sly knave who would rather
starve than work.

My father was a marvellous fisherman and a great man
for work. He was a stonemason and boat’s captain, and
handy at every trade. He often did a hand’s turn for other
folk, for in those days most of them were little better than
a drove of asses in a field. It was a great year for fish, that
year when I wore the grey petticoat, and was still throwing
an odd glance now and again at my mother’s breast, for
T had a fancy that I ought to be dragging at the teats still.
I suppose that they weren’t more than two years behind
me that time.

One morning my father was going out fishing. They had
a fine rick of turf on the hill, well on in the year, and they
had been told that all the turf had been stolen the day
before. He told my mother to do her best to bring some of
the turf home, for the day was fine. She threw the creel on
her back, and had brought back six creels of turf before the
pet woke out of his slumbers. She had to leave the turf
alone then and lend an ear to him now he was awake. She
dressed me in the grey petticoat and gave me a bite to eat,
and, though I ought to have been contented, I wasn’t. My
mother set the creel straight to make for the hill again, but
I had my eye on her and she had to let me go with her. I
could only make a shift at climbing the hill, crawling on
all fours sometimes, and I soon grew tired, so that she was
forced to throw me into the creel and carry me up the hill.
She cursed me once or twice, and I don’t blame her.

When she had filled up the creel with the turf, she signed


to me to be making my way down hill, but I made more
fuss about going back than I had about coming. I remem-
ber well that she put the toe of her foot under me and
lifted me clear off the ground to help me well away, and
said: “Bad cess to you, you’ve made a fine muddle of the
day on me.’ She had to carry me home in front of her with
the creel at her back as full as it had ever been before. She
dropped me on the floor, and told Maura to shove me under
a creel and leave me there to live or die. For all the tricks
I played, she brought down ascore of creels that day, and by
Sunday she had the whole great rick of turf safely housed.
My father got five thousand fish that week. My mother
would be telling these tales to the old hag over the way.

A hard year came about the time when I was still very
young. A ship was wrecked that year on the north side of
the Island. The ship was ground to smithereens, and her
cargo—some kind of palm-oil it was—went afloat in lumps
all over the sea. It was valuable stuff, and very little of it
would bring a poor man a half sack of white meal—yellow
meal hadn’t come in at that time. There were coastguards
in Dunquin in those days, and there was need of them, for
ships were always being driven in on the coast, as there was
no other contrivance known for propelling them but sails.
When the bluecoats (that’s the name they had in the
countryside) heard of the wreck in the Island and of her
cargo, they kept rushing into the Island night and day,
without allowing themselves time for sleep, for they had a
splendid boat, well-equipped, and they themselves were
knowledgeable men. They worried the life out of the
Islanders, who were trying to hide the lumps of palm-oil
in holes in places where neither cat nor dog could come
at them.

‘Anyhow the people lived very well in the Island that
year, though the bluecoats did their very best. They took
a lot of the palm-oil across Dingle Bay, and sold it on the


opposite coast every night, though the bluecoats got away
with enough of it to pay their rent, too. They came in on
their boat one day, only four of them. An Island boat had
just got in with six great lumps of the palm-oil in it. The
coastguards took them into their boat at once, and they
were very pleased with themselves, There was a young
woman on the landing-place with a huge lump of jagged
rock in her hands. She went into her father’s boat, and the
first thing the bluecoats knew was that she had flung the
rock right through the bottom of their boat and the ocean
was coming up through the hole. Out came the bluecoats.
Out came the lumps of palm-oil afloat once more. The
women brought them to shore again. The King’s men
had to drag their boat up the beach and patch her with a
piece of tin, and once they had her put to rights, they made
their best speed home. I fancy they didn’t come visiting
much more after that during all the palm-oil season.

Some time after that two of the men were on the
hill and they saw a sheep that had fallen down on one of
the beaches. They went down to recover the sheep, but,
looking round, one of them saw a brass bolt under an over-
hanging rock. He worked it out. It was four feet long. The
whole beach was full of them—bolts of brass and copper.
Nobody knows what quantity of that kind of metal the two
of them salvaged that day, for that was the beach on which
the ship had been wrecked, and great timbers from her
were still there. The Islanders made a good deal of money
out of the bolts that year.

Those were bad years, and if it hadn’t been for that
shipwreck; nobody would have survived on the Island, the
old people used to say. I often heard with my own ears the
old hag over the way saying that God Himself sent that
ship amongst the poor. They lived well enough for a year
or two because of her when the whole countryside on the
mainland was famishing in extremity. When my father


used to bring home a load of those bolts in a bag, it was
beyond my strength to stand one of them on end. It’s an ill
wind that blows good to nobody, and our folk often got
through a bad year with the help of storm and tempest,
though it was a bad business for poor people who were at
the mercy of the wind.

The day I first wore breeches I nearly went out of my
senses: I was like a puppy dog unable to stand still. I felt
no need to eat at all, and I didn’t eat anything, either, but
kept on running in and out, this way and that, and one of
the family keeping an eye on me. Now, once when I came
up to the fire, my mother looked at me and saw a patch of
wet on my grey breeches. ‘Heavens!’ said she, ‘that’s what
you’ve done, I'll bet.’ I told her that it was so, and that
I'd asked Nora to undo the buttons for me, and she hadn’t
done it. I suppose that was the first lie I ever told, for I
hadn’t asked Nora, though my mother gave her a good
talking-to for not doing it. It’s hard to be condemned for
a crime you haven’t committed, but see how soon roguery
showed itself in my nature. My father set about the
breeches again, for he was the one who had tailored them,
and he made a smart job of them, so that they were ready
for any use without trouble from that time out.

Eight years old I was that time, my mother said. Off I
went visiting from house to house through the village next
day, Eileen with me. It was the custom in those days, when
a boy had a new garment or a new suit, for him to go into
every house. You’d get a penny or two to put into your
pocket in each house. I had three shillings in the pockets of
the grey breeches when I came home. I gave them to my
father, I remember, though I’d rather have given them to
my mother, for she had more trouble with me than he had.
But since my father was a smoker and, after all, he had
made the breeches, I gave them to him.

Soon enough there was a hole through the bottom of the


breeches, with my shirt hanging out. My mother said that
she must patch them before she went to bed. She did it,
too, and warned me to take care and not make another
hole in them again so quickly or I’d get a slash of the stick.
I got it all right next morning!

Tt was a very fine day by the time I had a hen’s egg down
me and a cup of milk, and whatever else I had to go with
them—potatoes, I suppose. I didn’t escape the eye of the
old woman across the way as I ate that meal. Her talk was
changing now as she saw me growing in strength and spirits.

‘My dear,’ she would say to my mother, ‘keep at him,
He’ll make a fine man yet.’

She was wrong in that, too, for nobody since has ever
said that I was in any way kin to Oscar.

She was purring like a cat, to gain her own ends, for my
father used to bring home all sorts of game, and her own
man wasn’t handy in that way at all. He was a fumbler on
the hill and in the field, and good morsels were always
coming her way in our house.

I was leaping out of my skin on the floor at that time,
set up with myself, the grey breeches high and trim on me,
full to the chin of food; and, if anybody felt the troubles of
the world heavy on him at that time of day, it wasn’t me.

As the height of the morning came on, I was sent off to
the White Strand with Maura. When I reached the strand,
I ran for all I was worth. Maura cast an eye along the
strand and saw a school of porpoises rounding the Gob
from the south, and they never stopped till they came over
against us, just out from the shore, with their great fins
sticking up out of the water, all of them close together like
any shoal of fish. Maura had often seen them before swim-
ming singly, but she’d never seen a great school of them
like this. She thought that they would come ashore, and
she was terrified. She took me on her back, and we
hastened home.


When we got home my mother cried out that the boats
were coming, and that some of them were making a ring
round the porpoises, trying to drive them ashore. There
were three large boats working seine nets in the Island in
those days, and seven of them in Dunquin. Every one of
those boats was on the scene busy about the porpoises, the
Island boats trying to drive them ashore, while the crews
of the Dunquin boats remained standing by, jeering at
them. At last one of the porpoises went high and dry up on
the strand. Some able fellow drew his blood, and when
the rest of the porpoises smelt the blood they came
ashore, helter-skelter, to join the other high and dry on
the sand.

When the Dunquin boats saw the rich prey ashore and
those on land drawing their blood, in they came to take
boatloads of them home with them, but those on shore
wouldn’t let them take a single one. It wasn’t long till the
men there were as bloody as the porpoises, and the
Islanders drove them down the strand covered with cuts
and wounds. There was one Dunquin boat that never
stirred hand or foot to interfere. The Islanders gave them
the best porpoise on the strand, and the six other boats
went home without a taste of them. Some of them found it
hard enough to go at all. It was a tough job getting the
porpoises home and salting them. But the people didn’t
spare their trouble, for in those days you could hardly get
anybody to exchange a porpoise for a pig. My father’s face
was red with his own blood and the blood of the porpoises,
but I knew him well enough all the same, for I had my wits
about me then.

I jeered at the old woman whenever she came along
with a creel full of porpoise meat balanced on her rump.
You might imagine that she came out of one of the por-
poises herself with her creel, she was so thickly smeared
with blood. But she had earned a meed of praise, for she


nearly killed the captain of one of the Dunquin boats with
a blow of a shovel.

The Islanders had no lack of pork for a year and a day
after that day, and it would have lasted two years if it
hadn’t been for all the relations they had everywhere on
the mainland.

There was no risk of me forgetting that day even if I
should live to be a hundred. Everybody you saw was
crimson with blood instead of being pale or swarthy.
Another thing, I was within an ace of being killed myself
on the strand before any sea-pig or sea-bonham died, and
Maura with me, if we had been so unlucky as to be caught
in that skirmish with the porpoises on the shore.

The old woman took her food with us in the evening.

When I was a little lad, I used to hear tell of ‘the wheat-
ship’. That was another example of what storm on the sea
would bring us and the help it would be to us when other
people had suffered the limit of ill fortune. The year this
ship was wrecked on the White Strand I can’t remember,
for I wasn’t born or thought of in those days. But I know
well all that happened to her, and all the people she saved
from deathiin the famine time, and I can give an exact
account of her fate—how all her crew were lost when she
was Cast upon the strand, and not a soul of them all could
be saved. It was from the woman over the way and from
my mother that I learnt my lesson, for they used to be
chattering together often and often.

There wasn’t a vestige of canvas on the ship except for
one rag on the foremast. They had to run her ashore on the
White Strand. She struck far out, for she was deeply
loaded. The men on board tied a piece of timber to a rope’s
end, but they failed to come ashore. The people said that
they had never seen a wilder day. The wind was blowing
out to sea across the strand. At long last, a block of timber
from the ship came ashore on the strand somewhere.


Those on shore and those on sea dragged on the rope, but,
alas, it broke, and away went the sailors southward
through the smother. The Islanders have been the worse
for that sight ever since. A while after the ship split in
two.

If she destroyed her own crew, thousands survived the
worst year of the famine through her. Those thousands
of sacks of wheat saved the Islanders, for they lasted them
and their relations a long while. If it hadn’t been for her,
not a soul would have survived in the Island, and you may
be sure that the old hag said that it was God who sent her
to the poor.

Eileen was only a year old when the ship struck, and
she’s still alive in the New Land (i.e. America). Her con-
temporaries have had a pension for three years in this
country; that makes her seventy-three. My mother was on
the strand, though she was only six days up from childbed.
Pats, my brother, was strong enough to be there, too,
although he was more a trouble than a help there, for he
hadn’t wit enough to look after himself. A lot of things
came ashore, though there was much that didn’t, for the
wind was offshore.

The wheat began to sift out of her, too, as soon as she
split. I suppose that it wasn’t in bags at all, but cast loosely
into her like coal or salt, for they gathered it mostly at high
tide. It was drifting in from time to time—so as to give the
people a chance to save it, they used to tell one another.
They had to wash it in water to take the salt out of it, and
then spread it in the sun, and after that they dried it by
the fire. Then they would boil it till it softened and turned
to a thick mash. Baighrean the people called it. Whatever
else came their way, that was a great stand-by to them to
keep them alive. I used to hear the old hag saying to my
mother, again and again, that she never lived better in her
life than the time it lasted. She had a double row of teeth


and two sets of jaws grinding together. It was said that she
chewed the cud like a cow.

In the days when I wore the grey breeches, and went
about on my own, I used to go to meet the boats every
evening. The most common fish in those times was pil-
chard, and they were full of bones. They are very like
herrings. The fishermen hadn’t a good word to say for
them. They’re a small fish, and a lot of them go to a pound.
Moreover, they rotted the nets. My father called me into
the boat one evening, while they were throwing out the
fish, and he put me behind him in the stern. I was peering
about me, and before long I saw a line with a bit of
pilchard on the hook. And what do you say if I didn’t
throw out the bait. My father saw me doing it, but he
didn’t trouble himself about me, for he never thought that
there would be any fish so far inshore to take the bait.

But before long a fish bit, and I had the line twisted
round my legs. The fish dragged me overboard. All the
men on the harbour shouted out to my father, but, when
he turned round, he saw his darling swimming away. He
stuck the boathook into the grey breeches high up on my
backside and dragged me into the stern of the boat. He
pulled in the line, and it was as much as he could do to get
the fish aboard. It was a huge big conger six feet long.

My greatest fear was that my mother would kill me for
getting my breeches wet. The girls were bursting with
laughter at me, but I wasn’t grown up enough to have any
feelings of pride. Stout young women they were in those
days, up to their bellies unloading boats, as sturdy and
strong as any girls that ever were in Ireland.

I went home hand-in-hand with Nora till we drew near
the house, and then I struck and told Nora I wouldn’t go
a step farther, for my mother would kill me. She was coax-
ing me on, saying she wouldn’t. By the greatest luck in the
world my father came by, carrying a creel of fish. “What do


you want, Nora?’ said he. ‘Why don’t you take him home?
He’s dripping wet.’ “He won’t come with me,’ she said.
‘He’s afraid of mother.’ ‘O, come on, Tom, my lad. It was
my fault you got wet, for I called you into the boat,’ said
my father. He seized my hand, and off I went with him.

When I went in, I wasn’t as lively and playful as usual.
My mother saw that there was something up. She sat me
down near the fire, for she thought that something else was
wrong with me, and before long I had the hearthstone
swimming wet. My father came in. ‘Have you taken the
clothes off him yet, for he’s wet through?’ he said. He
was dragging the conger behind him. He brought it in, and
it was as long as the hearth.

*Yerra, is it how he fell into the sea?’ said she.

‘Don’t you see the fine big fish he caught? And for the
first fish he ever caught, it’s a very fine catch,’ said my
father.

He told her the whole tale then, and saved me. All my
clothes were stripped off me and dry things put on me.
I didn’t like the breeches I got, for they were an old,
patched pair. She didn’t give me tea either, but a mug of
porridge with milk, after all my swimming.
2. My Schooldays

MY FIRST TEACHER - THE SCHOOL : THE APPLE: THE
CAP FROM DINGLE - THE DERELICT BOAT + MAURA’S
MARRIAGE: THE WOMEN ON THE STRAND

THERE came a very fine day, a Sunday it was, and some
business brought in a big boat from Dunquin (nothing was
known of canoes in those days, or for some time to come).
When the boat reached the harbour, the people said that
there was a lady on board, but the lady turned out to be
a schoolmistress. When I heard that, I was anything but
pleased, for at that very time J was just beginning to go
hunting by myself on hill and strand, with nobody to keep
an eye on me now, for I was a big chap, they thought. I had
a little rod, with a hook hanging from the tip of it. Each
of us boys would have a score of minnows fished out of
holes, not much of a catch, but we kept pet gulls, and the
minnows were the very thing for them.

Well, Monday came, and when breakfast was over they
couldn’t find the man with the grey breeches. The girls
were ready for school, but the hunter was to seek. Maura
was sent out to look for me, but she reported to my mother
that I was after minnows, with two other boys in my
company—Johnny Meg and Mike Peg.

“He can have to-day,’ said my mother, ‘but may
God take my soul to-morrow if he slips off without my
knowing.’

I came to my gully and gave him the minnows I had
caught. When I went into the house I wasn’t so set up with
myself as I would be other days. I saw that my mother had
the net ready for me; besides, the old hag next door was in
before me to see the beating I was to get, for I used to be


mocking her unmercifully in those days. But my mother
was too clever for her!

When the girls came home from school, my mother
catechized them about the mistress, and asked what sort of
woman was she—kind or cross. They all said she was a
splendid woman, and that she didn’t strike or thrash them.
That’s when my mother brought the talk round to me.

‘Look at this fine fellow, running round all day since
morning, in danger of tumbling head over heels into a
pool, getting fish for his gully. But I’d have him know that
he’d better be ready in the morning to go with you, in
God’s name.’

“Maybe,” says Kate, ‘he’ll play the same trick on you
to-morrow, since you didn’t frighten him.’

She was the pertest of them all, and the one I liked best.

‘O, he’ll be a good boy to-morrow, Kate. The begin-
ning’s always the worst,’ said my mother.

We were on the best of terms with one another till bed-
time came, the girls talking about the school, and telling
my mother the teacher’s name. But they couldn’t bring
out the name till late into the night, and they started to
squabble together, so that I had as much fun over them as
they had over me earlier on. At last Maura managed to
get the name out—Nancy Donoghue. It was a difficult
name for them, as they had never heard anything like it in
the Island. Then off we all went to get ready for bed.

Next morning each one was ready for his post, and the
meal was prepared pretty early, for—‘the tide doesn’t stay
for high noon’.

Pats was in good trim in those days. He was the second
oldest of the litter, only Maura was in front of him. My
father was preparing ropes and a sickle for himself and
Pats up and down the house. Maura and my mother were
to go with them. It was flood-tide, and a fine day for
cutting black seaweed for manure. Kate was to be the


housewife; Eileen, Nora, and I were for school—that’s
how we were settled or arranged that day.

A potful of boiled potatoes, fish and milk with them, we
gobbled down our bellyful of them, young and old. As for
tea, nobody in the Island in those days had ever seen a
kettle, or for long after.

The horn blew, and off went the shore party, off went
the scholars.

Kate stayed at home, quite grown-up.

‘Be a good boy at school, Tom, my lad,’ said my mother;
and I thought she wouldn’t leave a trace of skin or nose on
me, she gave them such a scrubbing before she went to the
shore.

I was ten years old that day I first went to school, my
mother told me—about the year 1866.

As I went into the schoolhouse, hand-in-hand with Nora,
I was bold and lively. Poor Nora thought I would make a
show of her, but I didn’t. The teacher was in the doorway
and she gave me a fine apple, and I was surprised when I
went in that nobody else had one. But she didn’t intend to
give us an apple every day—though I thought then that she
did! It was a handsel apple given to every scholar the first
day. This was my first day, and that’s why I got it.

My prowess at school was little enough till I’d ground
down the apple. I had good grinders in those days, though
I can’t say the same of them now.

I didn’t take long to cast my eyes all round the house.
I saw books and papers in little heaps on every side. A
blackboard was hanging on the wall with white marks all
over it, made with chalk apparently. I was beside myself
with wonder what they meant until I saw the teacher
calling up the oldest girls to the blackboard and point out
the marks to them with the stick in her hand, and I heard
her talking some kind of gibberish to them.

I nudged Pats Micky, who was sitting by me on the


stool, He’s the same Pats Micky who has been King over
us now for a long while. I asked him in a whisper what was
the rigmarole the teacher was talking to the girls round the
blackboard.

‘Damned if I know,’ says he, ‘but I fancy it’s a sort of
talk nobody will ever understand here.’

I thought that hunger would make an end of me at
school, but bedad it wasn’t so, for pretty soon the teacher
spoke: ‘Playtime,’ says she.

The word made me stare, for I hadn’t the faintest idea
what it meant. But immediately I saw the whole crowd in
the school jump up and rush out through the door. Nora
had to take hold of my hand before I would move from the
stool. We all of us ran home.

There was a handful of cold potatoes waiting for us.
They were set down by the fire, and we had fish with them
—salted scad, and that’s a very sweet fish. My mother had
brought a dish of limpets from the strand with her, for they
had returned from it while we were at school. She was
roasting the limpets and throwing them to us one by one
like a hen with chickens. The three of us hadn’t much to
say, but were chewing away at the food till we were near
to being full. My mother began to question me then about
the school, for she was afraid I’d choke myself if I answered
her with my mouth full.

‘Well, Tom, my lad, isn’t school fine?’ says she. ‘How
did you like the lady?’

‘O, the great big apple she gave him!” said Nora.

I was cross with Nora for not letting me answer her for
myself.

‘Did you have one, Tom?’

‘I did, mom, but Nora took a bite of it, and so did
Eileen.’

‘But it was a great big apple,’ said Eileen; ‘we left
enough for you.’


‘Off with you again, my dear,’ said my mother to me.

We spent some time more in school, and the King kept
his seat on the stool at my side. He was a fine, easy-going
lump of a lad, and so he was always. We were the same
age. He’d often point his finger at some boy who was being
naughty—screeching out, maybe, or a pair of them setting
about one another with both hands, or a lout here and
there with his nose running. Sights like that worried the
King, and he used to point them out to me. See how the
character that is born in a lad sticks to him throughout his
life. That’s how it was with the King when he was a child.
He didn’t care for such disgusting, vulgar sights; but as for
the rest of them, it’s little enough they troubled their heads
about them. So it’s little wonder that when knowledgeable
people came our way and thought that there ought to be
someone with the style of King in the Island, they chose
out the man fit to take the title and to carry it with credit.

My day at school hadn’t lasted long enough yet for me,
and it was too early for me when the teacher called out:
“Home now!’

Some of them stuck in the doorway, they were so keen
to be gone.

A slice of bread and a drink of milk were ready for us.
There was always any amount of fish ready cooked, but
often we hadn’t any fancy for it. Pats used to have as good
a catch as my father in those days, and there was plenty
and to spare in the cabin for us, a marvellous fire, ‘kitchen’
enough to go with all sorts of food that came our way, to
gulp down with an edge on our hunger.

Off to the strand we went for the rest of the day.

The next day the whole lot of us were for school, for the
spring tide for seaweed cutting was gone.

I saw that my mother was wearing her new dress, and I
wondered what was up. She ran across to me and took me
by the hand, hung my clothes on me, and gave me a kiss.


‘Be a good boy now,’ she said, ‘until I come home. I'll
bring you some sweets from Dingle. Do what Maura and
Kate tell you, and go to bed when they say.’

I began to cry, but not for long. I started off for school
with Nora and Eileen. Maura and Kate stayed behind to
look after the house because my mother was going out.

When we went in, the whole crowd was there, though
my chum hadn’t come yet, the one I liked best. Little
books were being given out that day, new things were
being written on the blackboard and the old ones rubbed
out. Other big objects were hung up here and there on the
wall. I gazed at every one of them.

I had finished examining them all when the King came
in, and I was delighted to see him. His place was waiting
for him and he made his way to the seat beside me, and
from the way I saw him thrusting through the others, so as
to be next to me, I realized that he was as fond of me as I
was of him.

‘I’m late,’ said he in a whisper.

‘Most of them have only just come in,’ I said.

The teacher called us up to the blackboard. She ex-
plained the letters on it to us six times.

Friday came, and when the day was over and we were
getting ready to go home, she told us not to come back till
Monday. Most of them were delighted at this announce-
ment, but I wasn’t over-pleased, for I’d rather have come
back, not from any passion for learning, I suppose, but
because I liked being with my chum the King.

My mother wasn’t due back from Dingle till Sunday,
and Maura and Kate thought that they wouldn’t get me
to bed whatever they did, and they began to coax me and
to be very nice to me. But before bedtime came at all I fell
fast asleep on my father’s knee, and he told them to take
me to bed. They did it at once. It was the cock woke me in
the morning, and it was high noon then. Since I hadn’t lost


them any sleep the night before they were all busy about
me, all waiting on me. I wasn’t quite the fool they imagined
me to be, believe me. I had all my teeth and could use
them to eat anything, and was further on than anyone
would have thought at my age. For a proof of this, the old
hag over the way had stopped calling me ‘mother’s dar-
ling’ and ‘old cow’s calf’—all the things of the kind she used
to say to my mother about me, though anybody would be
ready to take his oath that the cow, whose calf she was,
was fifty years old.

On Sunday my mother came home from the town. She
had a white bag and a coarse cloth bag with her, and all
sorts of things in them. But there wasn’t a taste of sugar or
tea among them, for nothing was known of them in those
days. It was I who carried the white bag home, and I found
it heavy enough, though its chief contents were clothes for
the girls.

The grey old hag was waiting for me in the house to hear
the news from Dingle.

The first thing my mother took out was a two-peaked
cap, and she put it on my head.

‘By the Virgin!’ said my father, ‘you’ve made a complete
peeler of him!’—and all of them burst out laughing.

‘Well, maybe he’ll get a post yet,’ said she. ‘He’s young,
and learning’s to be got in his day, and he can stay at
school till he’s picked up all there is there.’

How well I remember that speech, for the troubles of
the world changed that tune.

She had apples, sweets, cakes, loaves, tobacco for my
father, a pair of boots for Pats, white dresses for the girls,
and a great deal more. The grey woman had a taste of
everything, for she was a little woman who liked a bit of
anything that was going.

School every day then for all of us, except Pats, who was
a great big fellow now going out fishing with my father.


Maura didn’t spend long at school either, for she was a
woman by this time. There were four of us getting on very
well, helping one another to learn.

One day, after we had been let out of school, we saw
all the people in the village collected on the cliff above the
harbour, and both the teacher and we wondered what was
up. A boy peered across to Slea Head, looking intently.

‘Holy Mary! look at the boats in the midst of the tempest
and the smother,’ said he.

The boats were given up for lost, and nobody thought
that we should ever see any of the crews again. The Island
boats had a boat adrift in tow and the sea was sweeping
right over them. They reached the harbour at last, for the
tide was with them, and that was a great help to them. The
wrecked boat was a fine big one. The captain was in her
with two other men and a young lad about sixteen years
old at his last breath. They lifted him to land out of the
boat, and he died immediately. He is buried in Castle
Point—the place where Pierce Ferriter had his tastle when
he ruled here.

It was beyond the power of the whole Island to bring
the wrecked boat to shore, and the great sea swept her
away again, My father was in her, acting as captain. Alec
was the name of the captain, a fine big man. The name is
still remembered on the Island, and will be for some time,
for there are many on the Island who were born the year
the boat came. They got salvage for bringing them to land,
and many of those who lodged them were well paid for
it. We were using a saw my father got out of her till the
other day.

My sister Maura was a fine vigorous woman by this
time, and as there were three more of them, they arranged
to find her a home in one of the other houses. The chief
man in the Island at that time was Paddy Martin. He had
ten milch cows for a long time, but I never saw that much


in his possession, for he had two sons married in other
houses, and he had given them some of the land, and cows,
too, no doubt. He had five cows at this time, and his
youngest son still lived at home unmarried—young Martin.
A match was arranged between Maura and Martin, for
what he wanted was a woman who knew what work was
and was able to do it; and, in all truth, Maura was a
woman of that kind, and I don’t say it only because she was
my sister. They didn’t ask my father for any money, for
they knew that he had none. They had had enough to do
to keep us alive in difficult times.

Martin and his father and mother were all living in the
. house in those days, four of them, counting Maura, after
the marriage.

Martin lived only a year after his marriage, and then
my sister had to return home to her own people, for one of
Martin’s brothers came back to live with the old people.
They wouldn’t give Maura anything, although Martin left
a boy child. Maura left the boy with us and went off to
America. After three years there she came back home
again. She had the law of them, and got the father’s share
for the son.

Soon afterwards the teacher was summoned home at
Shrovetide to be married. That meant that the school was
closed for a time until a thin lath of a master called Robert
Smith came. He wasn’t very nice to the rabble of scholars
he found. My chum the King didn’t like him at all. He
had an unfriendly way with him. The King used to
pretend to me that he came from Russia. A great mug he
had on him, hollow eyes, and a sleek swarthy complexion.
He had prominent teeth, and a bush dripping from his
nose like a goat’s beard. But the bush wasn’t the worst part
of him, for it was fair in colour and hid his ugliest feature.

The mistress married in a village in Ballyferriter parish.
Her husband was a blacksmith, and the parish priest


favoured him, I suppose. She got a school in that place,
and spent her life there till she got a teacher’s pension.
They are in the grave now, after eighty years of life, every
one of them. That was the end of the first school-teacher
that ever came to the Blasket.

Before long all the boys were whistling at Robert, and
the girls laughing, and I tell you there were great lumps
of women at school at that time. Robert soon saw that he
would never be able to do anything with them. He spent
only three months among us, and off he went.

As I was crunching my bite of food one morning, I was
looking about me on this side and on that. My mother
came in at the door with a sharp piece of iron in her hand
—a piece ofa boat’s grappling. She didn’t sit down, but set
about looking for something else. She found a bag in the
search. I was watching her like a cat watching a mouse, for
I knew that she meant to go down to the strand.

‘Well,’ said she, ‘would any of you like to go down to the
strand, the day is so fine?’

It has always been a custom here to go and get ‘kitchen’
from the strand to eat on Good Friday for anyone who has
the opportunity.

‘Sure, mom, I'll go with you,’ said I, jumping up from

‘the table, though I hadn't finished my meal.

‘Of course you can, but finish your meal, my love. I’ll
wait for you,’ said she.

‘I'll go with you, too,’ said Nora.

‘So will I,’ said Eileen.

‘There’s nothing to stop you,’ said my mother, ‘since
the world has been so good to you as to close the school.’

My father and Pats were digging in the field, Kate was
looking after the house—with the baby in her charge, for
Maura was over in the States. My mother charged Kate
not to think of anything else in the world but him till she
came back.


We went out at the door and turned our faces to the
strand, and I was beside myself for joy, if any of them was,
I was so set on paddling in the sea in my grey breeches.
When we reached the strand there wasn’t a single rock that
hadn’t a woman or child of some sort picking limpets and
winkles, and such-like seafruit of every kind, that came in
their way.

It was the ebb of a spring tide, and to the west of the
strand there was an island called Woman’s Island that
could only be reached at a very low tide: limpets and
winkles were very plentiful there because they were never
gathered. It was separated from the nearer shore by a deep
channel, but there wasn’t much water in it that day. Before
long I saw my mother gathering her skirts together and
bringing them forward between her legs. I didn’t mind a
bit that the world should see my mother’s legs and calves,
for there was nothing stunted or lumpy about her: she was
a fine well-grown woman, fair-skinned and bright from
crown to heel. My grief is that I don’t take after her in my
whole person. But I suppose what ruined me was that I
was ‘an old cow’s calf’, for the rest of the litter were good-
looking enough. I was watching her carefully to see what
she meant to do. She called out immediately to the women
near her to go to the Island with her. Four of them re-
sponded at once—the old hag over the way, my aunt, White
Joan, and ‘Ventry’. The water was above their knees, but
a wash upset my aunt and Ventry and tumbled them head
over heels. Ventry gripped my aunt very neatly, and they
set them on their feet again. Anybody would take his oath
that the old hag and my aunt came of the same parents;
they had the same complexion, the same height, and the
same way with them.

I was snivelling—my mother was so long out of sight.
Nora kept egging me on, but Eileen was trying to stop me.
Nora was always very much down on me, and we never


could get on together. But I understood the reason of it
when I began to grasp things, and the old hag used to give
me a hint of it, for, often enough, we’d just as soon be
fratching as praying. Nora had been the favourite for
five years before I came. I came unexpectedly, and, when
they saw me, Nora’s nose was put out of joint. And
that’s the reason why she thought less of me than the
others did.

_ Before long women here and there began calling out that
the women on the Island were cut off by the tide in the
channel. Not a soul of them was to be seen. Off went every-
body to look at the channel. The tide was flowing, and
there was a man’s depth in the channel already, and that
was the moment that they came into view, every woman
of them with a full bag. They had to stay where they were.
Everybody present said that they’d have to stick there till
morning, and I was beside myself when I heard it.

Some of the girls on the strand ran off to carry the news
to the men on the fields that the women were cut off by
the tide on the Island. Most of the men faced for the
strand, but my father ran to the house to get a ladder.
Very soon I saw him coming towards me with a ladder,
twenty feet long, on his shoulder. They laid it so as to
reach across the channel, but it was too heavy to put in the
proper place. My poor father had to take to the water and
swim. across to catch hold of the end of the ladder, and fix
it in a crevice in the rock. My mother was the first of them
to go across on the ladder. Ventry followed her, and they
came to land splendidly. Then the three others ventured
on it, Two of them were on one side of it, and the third on
the other side, so that the ladder overbalanced and upset,
and down they went into the sea.

I was in high spirits now I’d got my mother again,
singing ‘Donal na Greine’. But I changed my tune soon
enough, for my father had to jump into the sea again and


bring his sister to land on this side, and take a grip of
White Joan; and the old hag over the way was going under
when he caught her by the hair. I was at my last breath
by the time my father landed: the old hag very nearly
pulled him under as he tried to save her with her apron
full of limpets.
3. Our Houses

THEIR DESIGN: THEIR FURNITURE: OUR
ANIMALS AND FOWLS: OUR FOOD AND DRINK

I may as well give some brief account here of the way we
managed things in this Island when I was young, more
particularly since the fashion of that world has passed
away and nobody now living remembers it except a few
old people.

As for the houses that we had in my youth, and for
some time after, they differed among themselves, just as
in other places. Some of them had a handsomer appear-
ance than the rest, and others were pretty wretched. A
number of them were only ten feet by eight. Others were
larger—from that size to fifteen or twenty feet long. To
divide the house into two a dresser stood out from the wall
in the middle of the floor, and a partition met it from the
other side. There were two beds in the lower portion,
where people slept. Potatoes would be stored under
these beds. A great chest was kept between the two beds
up against the gable end. On the other side of the partition
—the kitchen side—the family used to spend the whole day,
or part of the day, ten of them perhaps. There was a coop
against the partition with hens in it, and a broody hen just
by it in an old cooking pot. At night-time there would be
a cow or two, calf or two, the ass, the dog on a chain by
the wall or running about the house. In a house with a
large family you would find a post-bed, or maybe a bed on
the floor. The old people used to spend the night in that
beside the fire, with an old stump of a clay pipe going, or
two pipes if there were two of them living, and smoking
away; they would have a wisp of straw for a pipe-lighter,


A good fire of fine turf smouldered away till morning;
every time they woke they took a light from the fire and
puffed at the pipe. If the old woman was alive, the old man
would stretch across to give her a light from the wisp; then
the smoke from the two old pipes would drift up the chim-
ney, and you could imagine that the couple’s bed was a
steamship as they puffed away in full blast.

Two or three dogs would stretch out at the foot of the
bed, the cow or the cows below them, head to the wall, and
there would be a calf or two with the run of the kitchen,
or lying muzzle to the fire. The ass would be tied up on the
other side of the house opposite the cows, and a cat with
a couple of kittens, maybe, in the chimney niche. The rest
of the trumpery in the house was stuffed under the post-
bed for the night. This bed was more than a couple of feet
from the ground, and it was made of wood or iron. Some
of the houses had no division to make a room, but there was
a post-bed in one corner and a bed on the floor in the
other. The dresser was up against the wall or the gable-
end. Every kind of house had two or three barrels of fish.
And, besides all the other animals, you would find a pet
lamb or two running about the house.

Those houses were made of stones mortared with clay,
and most of them were very roughly finished, for their
building was always hurried through, and everybody took
a hand in it. Rushes or reeds were the thatch, over a layer
of thick and stout scraws. The thatch would have been all
right if the hens would only have let it alone, but they
wouldn’t. As soon as the rushes began to decay, and
worms could be found in them, a man with a gun couldn’t
have kept the hens away from scratching and nesting there.
Then the drips would begin, and a dirty drip it was too,
for there was too much soot mixed with it. The hens nested
so deep in the thatch that the women often lost them, for
a hen wouldn’t even answer the call to food when she was


broody. The little lasses very often brought a hatful or a
capful of eggs down from the houses. The children made a
mess of the thatch, too, always hunting for eggs. It was as
good as a day at Puck Fair to listen to two of the women
whose houses adjoined, quarrelling with one another about
the ownership of the eggs.

The good houses were from ten to twelve feet wide, and
from twenty to twenty-five feet long. They had a cupboard
and a dresser arranged crosswise to make a room of the
lower half of the house, and two high post-beds below
them. They were thatched in the same way as the little
houses, though the hens had an easier job with the little
houses, because they were built lower. I remember, how-
ever, a funny thing that happened in one of the big houses,
the like of which never occurred in one of the little ones, in
this very matter of hens. The family of this house were
gathered, every one of them, round the table at supper, with
plenty of potatoes, fish, and milk before them, and all their
jaws keen set to grind them and send them on down. The
man of the house was sitting at the head of the table, with
a wooden mug full of milk beside him. He’d just put his
hand to his plate, to take out a piece of fish, when he saw
some object fall into the mug. He looked down, and there
was a lump of something drowning in the milk. They had
to fetch the tongs to get it out, and not a one of them had
the faintest idea what it was.

‘It’s a young chicken,’ said the woman of the house,
‘whatever the dickens brought it there?’

‘It doesn’t matter a damn to you what it is,’ said the man
of the house. ‘It has sent you out of your wits soon enough,’
said he, ‘for where on earth do you imagine a thing of that
kind could come in your way from?’

All at the table were getting madder, and Heaven
knows how the evening would have ended if another
chicken hadn’t fallen on the potatoes, alive and kicking.


‘For God’s sake, where are they coming from?” said the
woman of the house.

‘Can’t you see that they’re not coming from hell, any-
how,” said the man of the house. ‘It’s some consolation
that they’re falling from above.’

A lad at the lower end of the table glanced up at the
timbers of the roof and saw the wind and the sun coming
through.

‘Devil take it! there’s a hole in the house,’ says he to his
father. ‘Come here and you'll see it.’

When the man of the house saw the hole, ‘Wisha,’ said
he, ‘may Satan sweep all the hens and eggs and chickens
out to sea.’

‘God turn a deaf ear to you,’ said the wife.

When they went to the hole to close it, they found ten
other chickens and the hen.

I was cradled in one of the medium-sized houses. It was
a little cramped house, but what there was of it was kept
neat, for my father was a very handy man, and my mother
never knew what it was to be idle. She had a spinning-
wheel for wool and another for flax, and combs for carding,
and she used to have the job of spinning threads ready for
the tailor with the distaff from her own wheel. Often
enough she would spin it for the other clumsy women who
couldn’t put themselves in shape to do it, and were too
lazy, anyhow, even if they knew the trick.

Some ten years after my marriage I built a new house.
Nobody handed so much as a stone or a lump of mortar to
me all the time I was at work on it, and I roofed it myself.
It isn’t a large house, but, all the same, if King George
were to spend a month’s holiday in it, it isn’t from the
ugliness of the house that he would take his death. It is
roofed with felt, as every other house and shed in the
village was until the Board put up six slate-roofed houses.
When the new house was finished, a hen fluttered up on


to the roof. My uncle Diarmid was just going by. He
stopped to watch the hen and the desperate struggle she
was making to maintain herself on the roof, but the slippery
felt shot her off.

‘Devil mend you,’ said my uncle, ‘that the day has come
upon you when the roof shot you over the cliff?

In my young days Patrick Keane, and some time before
him, Patrick Guiheen, were the two chief men in the
Island. I remember when this Patrick Keane—the grand-
father of the King we have now—had four or five milch
cows. I never saw the other, Guiheen: his grandchildren
were alive in my day. I’ve often heard that he had eight
or ten milch cows, a mare, and a wooden plough. A red
mare she was. She helped to draw the gravel for the old
tower on the Island, whenever that was built, and he was
in attendance on her when he was sixteen years old. John
Dunlevy, the poet, was a baby in the cradle at that time.
That makes the poet sixteen years younger than the King’s
grandfather. The men of their standing had some half-
dozen houses that were pretty good.

The tables used in the little houses were rather like a
kneading trough—a board with a raised frame round it to
keep in the potatoes or anything else they put on them, and
a stand of tripod shape that could be folded up so that the
stand and the kneading trough could be hung up on the
wall till they were needed. *_

One day my uncle Liam came back from the strand
with a fierce hunger on him. The tripod frame was stand-
ing ready, with the kneading trough on it, full of potatoes
and whatever ‘kitchen’ went with them. A good-sized
potato fell from the trough. Off went the dog after it. He
carried the stand away with him, and the trough and all
its contents rolled every way through the house. His wife
fell to gathering up the potatoes. ‘Holy Mary! little
woman, it’s as good as a fair day with you,’ says Liam.


We had bowls and plates in every house, wooden mugs,
a chair or two, and a few stools. The chairs had seats of
twisted rope made of hay or straw. There was a pot-rack
of iron in every house, and still is, to hang things on over
the fire, and there was a pair of tongs of some sort or other
on the hearth.

They have cups and saucers in every house now and a
full dresser, making a fine show. Only human beings live
in the houses in these days; the animals have their own
sheds out-of-doors. Cressets and fish-oil, with tapers or
rushes on the cresset, renewed as they burnt away—that’s
the first contrivance for making light that I knew. The
fish-oil was got from scad and pollock. ‘Dip’ was the name
we gave to the scad’s fat; the pollock grease was called
‘liver’. We used to melt it. They employed seal-oil for
light, too, but they didn’t put much of that in the cressets,
for they used to gulp it down themselves, dipping their
bread of Indian meal in it, and they needed it badly
enough. I was well in the teens, I think, while this kind of
light was still in use. The cresset was a little vessel, shaped
like a boat or canoe, with one or two pointed ends, three
or four feet to it, and a little handle or grip sticking out of
its side—the whole thing about eight or ten inches long.
The fish- or seal-oil was put into it, the reed or wick was
dipped in the oil and passed over the pointed end of the
cresset, and as it burnt away, it was pushed out. The pith
of the rush formed the wick, and often they used a soft
twine of cotton or linen for it. They would often use a
large shell instead of a cresset for a light. I don’t remember
at what date paraffin came in. A fragment of turf or a chip
of bog-deal was the older fashion, I used to hear them say.

I lived for a long time from my young days on two
meals a day. I’d have a lot of work done on strand or hill
or in the field, and the cows would be coming to milking
when I’d be thinking about taking my morning meal. The


sun would be far down in the west when I had the evening
meal. We never called them breakfast or supper, but always
the morning and the evening meal.

Potatoes and fish and a drop of milk—if there was any—
that was our food in those days. When the potatoes failed,
there would be only Indian meal, just shelled. People
to-day couldn’t make a shift to eat the bread it made, do
what they would; they haven’t got the teeth for it. I am
sorry that I don’t have the same food to-day, with the
same jaws to eat it with, and the same good health.

In the days when I was young two stones of flour used to
come in every Christmas. I was a grown man before tea
was known, and, when a pound of tea came our way for
Christmas, it was sparingly used, and the remnant saved
up till the next Christmas. But the tune has changed
altogether in the matter of food for a long time now. We
have wheat-flour in these days, and tea and sugar. Some
of them fiddle with food four times a day. At that time we
used to eat as much food in one meal as in those four meals
put together. People lasted two days on one meal of the
kind, if they needed to. A man can’t go a pike’s length in
these days without tumbling on his backside, for they don’t
eat a meal at all, but a miserable bite or two.
4. In School and Out

THE FAMILY OVER THE WAY: A NEW TEACHER
COMES: THE CRABS+ THE FOUR-~EYED INSPECTOR

THERE was only a yard between us and the house over the
way, and both houses had only one door apiece. The other
family had the lower half of the yard and we the upper,
and the two doors faced one another. If the old hag had
wanted to, she could have scalded my mother from her
own doorway with boiling water, and my mother could
have done as much to her. My mother often bade me keep
clear of the grey woman, for she had a cranky nature, and
she herself had to purchase peace from her, and that was
true. Still she had a generous heart.

My mother used to do everything for her, for she was an
untidy worker, and so was the man she had—my father
used to tighten up everything for him, spade and ass gear,
even the thatch on his roof. I never saw a man more
unhandy at his work than he, but he was a thoroughly
decent man. Bald, or Crop-eared, Tom they called him,
for he hadn’t a button’s breadth of ear on him. But he had
the brains of the seven seers in his head, so that, if he only
had had the education, he could easily have bested the
whole of Ireland. My mother often sent me to him to find
out when such and such a holy day was due, and if they
were eating any manner of food, the two of them would
come between me and the door to force me to take some
of it. I never knew a more hospitable cabin, and since it has
come to pass that all who lived in it in my time are with
the company of the dead, and I live still, may God grant
them a better habitation than that poor wretched hut.

They had a son and a daughter, I don’t know whether
there were ever any other children, The daughter had her


mother’s wild hair, and the son was a stunted, spiritless
loon, and he had his father’s untidiness. The sea never
suited him. He’d no sooner set foot in a boat than he’d be
seized with violent vomiting. So he never brought back
a catch from the sea, and he spent much of his time as a
labourer.

There was nobody living in the Island, young or old, or
in the mainland parishes either, that Bald Tom didn’t
know his exact age—the day, the year, and the hour of his
birth. The people said that there wasn’t his like for a long
memory in the countryside, though he didn’t know the
ABC in any language. He often used to tell me that the
Christmas cakes were ready baked when I was born, on St.
Thomas’s Day, that comes three days before Christmas—
that was the day my mother found me on the White
Strand. ‘How many years ago is it now?’ the grey woman
would ask. He never hesitated: ‘Fourteen years ago come
Christmas,’ he would answer.

From that time on the old hag used to be making up to
me, for my house made me the messenger between the two
houses. I took more from my house than I brought back to
it. ’m not making a boast of it. Maybe it wouldn’t have
been so if there had been plenty in the other house.

I remember one Sunday, when every lass and lad faced
for the White Strand, every one of them carrying a hurley,
and after a meal, not of bread, but of potatoes. Soon I
was ready, too, my clothes well buttoned up, new clean
breeches of undressed sheep’s wool, my policeman’s cap
with the two peaks, and my face dipped into a basin of
water and scrubbed clean. It wasn’t my mother who
washed me in those days, for I was a man grown, my
boyo!

I started for the strand with my hurley—a furze stick
with a twist in the end of it. Nora and Eileen went with
me, and we went straight ahead till we were in the middle


of the hurly-burly, and not a one of them on the strand
wore shoe or stocking. Those days of hurling on the strand
on Sundays were the hardest days any of the young people
had to face.

Somebody spied a boat coming from Dunquin under
full sail, and when she was making the harbour we all left
the strand and went to meet her. There was a woman in
the stern, the new teacher, a sister of the first one, Kate
Donoghue, a fine, comely girl.

School again on Monday, you may be sure, and we were
all of us at our posts. Sure enough the King found his place
next to me. As I was ten years old when I went to school
for the first time (1866) I must have been fourteen at that
time—that is, in the year 1870. The teacher had new little
books to distribute. She kept the blackboard going, too,
and she was amazed that there was hardly anything she
put on the board that one or other of us couldn’t explain,
so she had to make it harder. The Island children took
great delight in this new employ, and, that being so, they
had a natural gift for learning. Some of us had the spirit
of a King: all of them had the spirit of the sea and the
great ocean in them. The breeze blowing from the shore
was in their ears every morning of their lives, scouring their
brains and driving the dust out of their skulls. Though I
had a King inthe making to sit by me whom the hammers
of a smelting mill couldn’t drive from my side—whatever
it was that made him take interest in me—he kept me from
going ahead, for he was always glancing restlessly this way
and that. That’s the chief fault I had to find with him, for
he was always distracting me just when I was beginning to
make some progress, We got on very well, but we were
always glad to see Saturday come to set us free to go
romping off wherever we wanted.

Well I remember one of those Saturdays after St.
Patrick’s Day. It was a fine, calm year, and there was a


dearth of fish in the village just then. My father came in at
the door, after working in the field, and there wasn’t a bite
of food ready for him, ‘What’s brought _you home?’ said my
mother to him. ‘It’s a lovely calm day,’ says he. ‘If I
could get a crab, I might have the luck to catch a string
of rockfish,’ and out he went again.

What do you think if I didn’t go out after him, and when
he saw me coming after him, “Where are you going?’ says
he. ‘I'll go with you,’ said J, ‘and look after any crabs you
catch.’ He went eastwards past the landing-place, and out
to an island there. He had to swim across. He dipped his
head under water and brought up two crabs from one
hole.

He brought them to where I was standing and gave
them to me to keep—a male and female crab. The names
we give to two crabs in one hole are collach and fuaiscedn.
Collach is the word for the male crab, and he hadn’t been
long in my hands before his claws separated, and when
they closed again he caught me by the thumb and the
next finger to it, and I couldn’t shift or shake him off.
T screamed like anything for terror, and my father heard
me at once. He came running to where I was, for he knew
well enough why I had screamed. The crab had me in so
tight a grip that my father was forced to break its claw
off, and even then he couldn’t get the claw apart without
smashing it with a stone.

Well, there were my two fingers useless, and the worst of
it was, it was my right hand. My blood was sprinkled on
the ground and my fingers as black as coal, but my father
didn’t mind so long as I hadn’t fainted—though I was near
enough to it. He twisted his hat-lining round the fingers.
He expected that my mother would be angry with him for
letting me go with him, but she wasn’t. My sisters were
very sorry when they saw the state I was in at the end of
the day. My mother plunged my hand in hot water and


washed it carefully. That did it a great deal of good.
Then she got a plaster and bound it up. The pain left it
then.

I was singing ‘Donal na Greine’ at once. The grey
woman came in to ask after me. If she was an old gossip,
she didn’t want me to lose my fingers. I’ll take care to give
her her due, since I can’t explain my own life without
bringing her in again and again, for I never got a sight of
the sky any morning in the year without seeing her, too.

My father had four crabs. He thrust them into a bag
and went off along the hill, a good way back, to find the
likeliest places. He was away the length ofa tide and more,
and he didn’t come back empty-handed. He had a bagful
of fine speckled rockfish, and when my mother emptied
them out there was a heap of them. She took up a big one
and turned to me with it. ‘Here, Tom, my lad, be off with
this one to the grey woman.’

I didn’t say no to my mother, even if I’d been unwilling
_-and I wasn’t. Off I went with the rockfish, and handed
it to the old hag. She wondered where I had got it, for she
didn’t know yet that my father had caught anything. She
liked me well enough by this time, though there had been
times when we weren’t the best of friends. She began to be
so sweet to me that you’d have thought that I was a little
god to her, Bald Tom, her husband, was at home, and the
daughter and the son, too. They’d just finished their morn-
ing meal.

‘Have you got anything to give him?’ said Bald Tom.

‘I’ve nothing that he hasn’t got already,’ said she, “but
T’ll give him this girl for a wife when he’s two years older.’

Although she couldn’t have promised to give me any-
thing more precious to her than the fruit of her own womb,
I felt at once that that promise would bring me more
harm than good.

The speckled rockfish and the old hag’s speech plunged


me into despair, and no wonder, when you think of the
gift I was to get when two years were up.

The new teacher spent three more years with us before
she caught her sister’s complaint—a marriage proposal.
Her people came from the neighbourhood of Dingle, and
a lad from the town married her—a pleasant, personable
man.

We were in school one day when a boat came from
Dunquin. A watch was kept for all the boats coming in,
for unpleasant people were about in those days—drivers
and bailiffs watching to snatch everything they could lay
their hands on, and leave you to die of hunger.

But the man in the boat that day was a school inspector,
and not one of that kidney. When we heard that, we were
in a bad way. A lad kept going to the door to see when he
would come in sight. A bouncer of a girl saw him first.
She dashed back from the door with a look of horror in
her eyes. Soon enough he entered the house. You could see
a child here and there with his hand over his mouth, and,
as for the big girls, one of them burst out laughing, and
pretty soon another one joined her. The inspector had his
head in the air staring, now at the wall, now at the timbers
of the roof, and now at the school children.

‘Holy Mary!’ said the King to me in a whisper, ‘he’s
got four eyes!’

“He has,’ said I, ‘and a light to match in them.’

‘I’ve never seen a man like him,’ said he.

Whenever he turned his head, there was a glitter in his
eyes. At last the whole crowd burst out laughing—all the
big ones, and the young ones were screeching for fear. The
teacher nearly fainted with shame, and the inspector was
beside himself with rage.

“There’ll be murder done,’ said the King again under
his breath to me. ‘I wonder now did anyone ever see
another man with four eyes?’


That was the first person wearing spectacles that the
children ever saw.

The inspector gave the teacher a good talking-to, in a
jargon that neither I nor anyone else in the school under-
stood, and when he’d finished his speech, he seized his bag
and went out of the door, and on board the boat that was
waiting for him, and never came back to the Blasket again.

This madman left the school as he found it, without
putting a question to a single child, and I’m ready to make
a bet with my readers that they’ve never read of a similar
case, nor will as long as they live. The poor mistress fainted
as soon as he’d gone. I had to go and fetch a cup of fresh
water for her. Eileen sent me to the next house for it.

We had full leave to talk before the teacher recovered.

‘We'd better run off home,’ said the King to me, ‘while
she’s weak, for she’ll surely kill us when she comes to
herself.’ .

‘Yerra, there isn’t much of a soldier in your make. What
a funk you’re in!’ said I. ‘Wait a bit and we'll get what the
others get.’

In round about half an hour’s time she came to. All of
us thought that she’d leather us as long as there was any
warmth in our bodies, but things are not always as you
expect, and so it was this time. She didn’t strike a blow
or speak a sharp word to any of us. She could have dealt
with the case of one or two, but, since we were all in the
same boat, she treated us sensibly—a thing she couldn’t
have done if she hadn’t possessed sense. She sent us home
at once, and she had as sore need as any of us to get back
to her own house.

The King was as fascinated as any of the scholars by the
sight of four eyes in one man’s head, but he never said as
the others did—that the man came from hell.

A month or two later another inspector came to us: a
lean, swarthy, withered man, but he had only two eyes in


his head. He fell to work and asked us all searching,
difficult questions. There were eight in my class. One or
two of them rose high and tall above the others. Though
all of them had fine handsome heads, and the inspector
thought that such heads must hold the answer to every
question, that wasn’t the way of it at all, for the little skulls
put them to rout. The inspector was in the brightest of
humours when he left. He gave a shilling to the best
scholar in each class, and when he handed out the shilling
to our class, it wasn’t one of the big ones that got it, but
myself. My father was delighted when I gave it to him.
He got a fine lump of tobacco out of the inspector, though
it wasn’t only the inspector that brought it to him, for if
I’d failed in class, it wouldn’t have come his way.
5. My First Visit to Dingle

IN A BOAT ON THE SEA+ THE VIEW ON
LAND: JERRY SEASICK: DINGLE: THE NEW SHOES

Ir was holiday-time with us for a while after that, and it
was a fine calm year. The big boats were bringing home
quantities of fish. The three of them were full to the brim
every day. As my father and Pats had two men’s share, we
always had a fine show of fish in the little house.

That was the first time, I think, that I ceased to be a
spoilt darling, for my sides were sore that day from carry-
ing the fish home in a bag on my back. Each man of the
crew had a thousand fish, so that made two thousand for
us. My father said that I carried more than a thousand
home. ‘And Ill take you to Dingle with me to-morrow,
if the day’s fine,’ said he, ‘for the boat’s going to fetch
salt.’

When I heard that I could have cleared a house with
one leap.

It wasn’t me, but Kate, that was first to look out at the
door next morning, for she was my mother’s help at that
time. She was too big and too old when the school came.
I saw her right enough.

‘How’s the day, Kate?’ said I.

‘Very fine,’ said she.

I was at her side on the hearth at one bound.

‘Holy Mary! what’s got you up so early, or what are you
after?’ said she.

My father was the next to get up, and he put on his
new clothes. He looked out at the door. Then he told Kate
to give me my new togs. She didn’t know till then what
I was after.

My father took a bagful of rabbits’ skins, and off he


went to the harbour. The others came along, one by one,
as they were ready, till the whole boat’s crew was collected.
They came about the boat on either side, and thrust her
down till she was afloat on the main sea, The oars and
sails were put aboard, and then they set her prow to sea
and her stern to land, as they did in the old tales long ago.

Two sails were run up, and we had a good helping wind
east along Dingle Bay. Another lad of my own age was in
her, a cousin of mine named Jerry. By the time the boat
was east of Slea Head, Jerry was changing colour till he
was as white as paper. The men knew well enough what
was the cause of his change of colour, but I hadn’t the
least idea. I thought he was on the verge of death. His
father came to look at him, and told him that if he could
be sick, he’d be ali right. The boat was running along very
sweetly now, for she had wind and to spare. Soon one of
the men said that Jerry was being sick. He was, too, poor
chap, and all the food he’d swallowed that morning was
thrown overboard to feed the gulls. I was bursting with
laughter, and Jerry was crying.

An uncle of mine was at the helm, and I kept putting
questions to him, asking about every strange thing I saw.
There was a big slate-roofed house in the middle of a farm.
“Who lived or lives in that house?’ I asked.

‘A pretty bad person,’ said he, ‘Bess Rice. Have you ever
heard tell of her?’

‘I’ve often heard my father, and Bald Tom, too, talk
of her,’ said I.

When we came in sight of the fine, broad harbour of
Ventry, we could see a lot of big, white houses. He named

" every one of them—the Catholic church and the Protestant
church, the police barracks, and the coastguard houses,
and everything else that took my fancy.

My companion was coming to himself now that the
gulls had snapped up all the contents of his belly; his voice


was a feeble, famished squeak, and he had a worn, deathly
look. He came over to where I was with the steersman, who
was his uncle, too.

‘How far is it to Dingle Harbour?’ he asked the captain.

‘By my cloak! it’s a fair way yet, my good lad,’ said he,
‘and I think you'll never get there alive, since you’ve
nothing left in you but your guts. Sure you’re not a bit like
the other lad.’

The words had hardly left his lips when the men saw a
fierce squall of wind, and they had to pull down the stern
sail, and the boat hardly managed to carry the foresail—
the sea whitened so under the wind.

She was not long after that in making the mouth of the
harbour. I thought at first there was no harbour there at
all until we'd got half-way in, it was so narrow, but after
a bit it widened splendidly till it looked like a lake.

We reached the quay, and my eyes were as big as two
mugs with wonder. I saw gentlefolk standing there with
chains across their bellies, poor people half-clad, cripples
here and there on every side, and a blind man with his
guide. Three great ships lay alongside the quay, laden with
goods from overseas—yellow grain in one of them, timber
in another, and coal in the third.

Before long my father called to me, saying that all was
in readiness, and that the men were going up to the town.
Off we went, I and the boy Jerry, and, though there was
little enough remaining in his body after the passage, he
would rather have been left looking at the ships than
attend to the call to food. All the crew of the boat, big and
little, crowded into one house. There was a table laid with
bread and tea for us, and I promise you there was little
said till we were near to being full fed. They paid the
woman of the house, and out they all went.

The salt shop was the next place they went to. Every
man had his own bag with him. Two hundredweight of


salt was put in each bag, and we left the salt there till we
should be ready to go back.

I followed my father then into all the shops, and, though
Jerry’s father was there, too, he stuck close to my heels.
The pockets of the grey breeches were not empty of money
that day. When the boat was ready to start on the return
journey, my father searched my pockets, and, as most of
their contents was copper, there was a good heap there.
When he had finished reckoning up, ‘By the breviary!’ said
he, ‘you’re only a shilling short of the price of a pair of
boots.’

Who should be present at that moment but a sister of
his, a woman who was always in Dingle—now at home and
now in the town. ‘If that’s so,’ said she, ‘here’s the shilling,
too, for you, and put the boots on him, since this is the
first time he ever came to town.’

When I heard my aunt say that, my heart leapt for joy,
for I knew well that my father wouldn’t go back on his
word. I was right.

‘Come along then, we can get them just up there.’

Off I went with him, wild with delight. I had no stock-
ings to put on my feet, but the woman in the shop gave
me some stockings on condition that my father should
bring them back again. It’s then that my boots squeaked
under me. It’s then that I felt a gentleman. And who
dared say that I wasn’t! A suit of undressed wool on me
and a two-peaked cap! Jerry was cheerful enough till he
saw the new boots on me, but he hadn’t a word to say after
that..

When the boat reached the landing-place in the Island,
loaded with salt and food from Dingle, according to the
custom which we still have to-day in the Island, the cliff
above the creek was crammed with people, be sure, to see
if there was any news. There was nobody in the boat that
they didn’t recognise at a glance but the young gentleman


—-some of them maintained that he was a child of great
people in Dingle who were sending him to spend a week
running about the Island. One of my sisters, Eileen, was
among them on the cliff, and she couldn’t be certain that
it was me because of the shining glory about my feet, for
I was a thin-legged, barefooted starveling when I left
home. Kate and Nora were at the boat down by the water.
Pats, my brother, carried the bag with two hundredweight
of salt home on his back, for some of the fish was still
unsalted.

My mother thought some great finished man was
coming when she heard me pounding along with my pair
of boots. Everybody marvelled at my getting boots so
soon, for in those days men and women alike didn’t usually
put on boots until their wedding day.

The two of us who had been in Dingle were served with
a three-cornered lump of bread and a saucepan of milk.
We didn’t care for fish; we were sick of it. Nora jumped up
and brought four eggs.

‘I thought,’ said my mother, ‘that there wasn’t an egg in
the house to-day.’

‘I found a hen’s nest on the roof yesterday with eight
eggs in it,’ said she.

*You’d wait long enough before you found a hen’s nest,
or a cock’s nest either, on the roof of a slated house,’ said
old-fashioned Kate.

When I’d devoured my lump of yellow bread and my
saucepan of milk and my two eggs, out I went, and lost no
time in going straight into the old hag’s house to have a bit
of fun with her, for I was as deft a speaker as herself by this
time. The poor woman welcomed me home from Dingle.
‘May you live to wear out your boots; how soon they’ve
put them on you!” said she.

When I saw how courteously she treated me, I put my
hand in my pocket and gave her an apple. I gave them all


an apple, and sweets, too, for my mother had charged me
to do it. She sprang up, crunching the apple like a horse
chewing, and took half a rabbit out of the pot and handed
it to me.

‘Perhaps you’d fancy that,’ said she, ‘since you’re such
a man,’

‘But I can’t eat it,’ said I.

‘Give it to your mother, then,’ said she.

I took the rabbit home with me and handed it to my
mother. She gave me a leg of it, and I picked it.

Night was coming on, and very soon I began to nod and
went to bed. I fell dead asleep at once, for I was weary
after my visit to the town.

It was school time and past next morning when I
jumped out of bed. My mother told me that I had almost
died in my sleep. I was as lively as a trout then, however.
T plinged my head into a basin of water and rubbed the
sleep out of my eyes, and off I ran to school.
6. Bald Tom and the Old Days

THE SCHOOL CLOSED AGAIN*> A HOOK IN MY
FINGER + THE BOAT OF GORTADOO: BEATING
THE LAW: THE BURNING SHIP: THE NORA
CREENA + THE AGENTS

TheKing was in his usual place, and, being big and heavy,
must have left his mark on the stool. He was whispering to
me about Dingle. He’d been there himself—three times,
once with his grandfather, and the other times with his
father. But it was ‘sweets’ that were at the bottom of his
blarney. I knew that well enough, and I should have been
a poor friend, too, if I had forgotten him. I handed four to
him, and he was very grateful.

We were let out in the middle of the day.

‘Listen,’ said the King. “The mistress will be leaving
us soon.’

‘How do you know?’ said I.

‘She got a proposal yesterday. She is to be married
at once.’

‘What sort of a man is he?’

‘A gentleman’s coachman somewhere.’

He was right, for she only spent the week with us, and
went out on Sunday. The school was shut again.

It was about 1873 that the second mistress left us. That
meant I was sixteen. I had had six years at school, and I
hadn’t mastered English or near it.

On Monday—since there was no school—the King ran
in to me pretty early in the morning. He had had his
breakfast, too, and I was just beginning mine. I was eating
a fine fresh loaf of new yellow bread, just taken from the
fire, and ‘since it’s a rare thing to see a cat with a saddle
on him’, as the old saying goes about any improbable


thing, I had a lump of butter, too. We had a good milch
cow, and my mother had made a lot of butter in a big tin.
I had a salted scad and a saucepan of milk, and, better
than all, a mill of teeth to grind them with.

My mother was pressing a hunk of bread and some
butter on the King, but he wouldn’t take it. Probably he
hadn’t much appetite left that morning, My mother would
never have offered the yellow bread to him, if he had been
called ‘King’ in those-days, but he wasn’t.

The King’s business with me was to take me fishing from
the rocks if we could get a crab for bait.

“Take care of yourselves,’ said my mother, ‘when you're
after the crabs, for it’s neap-tide.’

Out of the door we went to hunt for crabs, but we had no
luck at all.

‘There’s nothing in these little holes,’ said the King.
“We'd better take our clothes off and go under the water
in some place where we're likely to get them.’

No sooner said than we were stripped to the pelt and
diving under and coming up again both of us. I went into
a hole as deep as myself, and when I got my foot into the
hole there was a crab there. It was hard for me, and more
than I liked, to get my head down as far as my feet, but it
was harder still to let go the thing I wanted. I bent down,
but the water kept me up, and I couldn’t get my hand to
the crab. I thrust my foot down into the hole again, and
what do you think! I fetched him up on one of my big
toes. He was a huge male crab, and, usually, if one of those
is in a hole, his mate is along with him. I put my foot down
again and found the other one, but it was a smaller one
than the first, and came easily. I had enough bait for the
day then.

The King came to me with his clothes all buttoned up.

“Come along,’ said he, ‘we've got plenty of bait for the
day. You have two fine crabs, and so have I.’
ISLAND KITCHEN


I dressed, and off we went along the rocks. The King
had to go back to the upper village, for he wanted a line
and hooks. But he was with me again at once. We went
westwards to Dunlevy’s Point, named after the Island poet.
Rockfish were biting freely, and every now and again we
pulled up a fine fish and put it behind us, At last I was
throwing out my line, and if the hook didn’t catch in my
finger! I’d caught my last fish that day! The King had to
cut the twine that bound the hook to the line with his
knife. The hook was fixed in my finger with the twine
hanging from it. I didn’t feel much pain, as the hook
wasn’t very far in. We had forty rockfish—twenty apiece.
The King carried them all home, and we divided them in
our house. The hook was taken out at once, for Kate cut
away the piece of skin in which it was fixed with the razor.
My finger gave me a lot of pain, and I suffered a good deal
before I was through with it.

Bald Tom used to spend every night with us till bed-
time. He was excellent company, and I hardly noticed my
sore finger most of the time when he would be talking and
telling tales of the-hard times he had known. Though my
father was much the same age, he hadn’t half his gift for
remembering the past and recalling every detail.

‘I wonder,’ said my father one night, ‘what the trouble
was that set the parishes of Dunquin and Ballyferriter by
the ears for so long in those days?’

‘O,’ said Bald Tom, ‘haven’t you heard the tale of the
Boat of Gortadoo?’

‘I have, indeed,’ said my father, ‘but I don’t remember
it very well now.’

‘There was a ship adrift north of Beginish and a Dunquin
boat went out to her. They boarded the ship and threw
down into the boat everything they fancied. A boat set out
from Gortadoo with twenty-one men in her—the chief
men in the parish. They never stayed till they came up to

the drifting ship. On board they went, looking for booty
and laying their hands on things already picked out by the
Dunquin people. They came to blows and had at one
another, and the Dunquin men were driven from the ship.
The Ballyferriter crew were throwing things out of the
ship till their boat became overloaded and sank, and every
soul in her was lost except the last two, who remained on
board throwing the things down, and they never came out
of her.’

‘Perhaps those two are still alive in her,’ said I to Bald
Tom.

“Hush, you whelp,’ said he. ‘That ship was smashed to
atoms against Ferriter’s Raven that very afternoon.’

‘And how did it come,’ my father asked Bald Tom again,
‘that the people of the northern parish were so bitter
against the Dunquin folk for so long after?’

“Yerra, my friend,’ said Tomas, ‘because they didn’t take
a single one of them out of the sea, though they were
beseeching them, and gripping the blades of the oars,
praying them to take them in, but all they did was to drag
the oars out of their grasp and leave them to go with the
tide.’

‘And wasn’t it strange that they didn’t save some of
them, though their boat could hardly carry all the twenty-
one in addition to her own crew,’ said my father.

‘It wasn’t possible for them to take them all,’ said Bald
Tom, ‘and they weren’t keen to do it either, seeing that
they had attacked them in the ship and had taken out of
their boat anything they needed or had a fancy for, and
had refused to let them come near the ship once they
themselves were on the scene.’

‘I suppose,” said my father, ‘that the two crews were
related to one another.’

‘They were,’ said Tomas, ‘some of them very closely,
and that nearly caused the wreck of the Dunquin boat, for


one man tried to drag on board a relation of his who was
clinging to an oar-blade. But the captain put a stop to that,
saying: ‘““They’ll all be trying, one after another, to save
their own relations, and the boat would never manage it.”
So the twenty-one from the Gortadoo boat were drowned
and the Dunquin boat came safe home with all her crew.’

‘I expect the people of the northern parish were savage
with them,’ said my father to Tom.

‘Yerra, man,’ said Tom, ‘they were laying for them at
church and at the fair. Didn’t they come over in the dead
of night? They used to go into the houses and maltreat the
people in them. They killed a fine young fellow, the son of
a woman of my kin, in the mill of Belaha, out there on the
mainland, and every market-day in Dingle there would be
six or seven in need of a priest after the day’s brawls.’

‘And what made peace between them in the end?’ said
my father.

‘I'll tell you that,’ said Tom. ‘A girl from the cantanker-
ous crowd wedded a Dunquin man—that was the first
peace between them. But it was a long time before that
came to pass—after they’d half-killed one another!’

‘God bless the souls of the dead!’ said my mother. ‘I
never heard a proper account of their doings until to-day.
They were a merciless, savage lot in those days. Thanks
be to God, again and again, that that world is passed
away!’

It was getting near bedtime and Tom was thinking of
going home and the rest of our family coming back from
visiting in the cottages.

I spent a month suffering from my finger, with little
pleasure or merriment. But it never felt sore or painful
while Tom was telling his tales. He used to be in our
house every night, and, as my father said the rosary every
Sunday, Tom repeated it every Sunday with us, and he
was a great hand at reciting his decade.

Tom was poor always, and he had to put his son out to
service in Ballyferriter. He spent five years herding cattle
there, without a shoe or a stocking to his foot. Not long
after the son went, the passage-money for America came
for the daughter from an uncle of hers on the mother’s side.
She went off at once and spent five years there. They had
to fetch the son home then. The girl sent a pound or two
across the water now and again that was very useful to
them.

The old hag over the way was often up very early in the
morning after her daughter went away, and she was often
heard keening in the dawn. There was nothing strange in
that, for the girl was all she had, and she never looked to
see her again. Every time I heard her keening, I felt very
sorry for her.

One morning that she was out early, what should she
see riding off the harbour and the White Strand but a
steamship at anchor, full of dark men—that is, men with
dark clothes and caps. She rushed off in a panic and
knocked at.our door.

‘Donal,’ she cried.

‘Hullo! said my father. He thought that there was
something up with her son or with Tom himself.

‘What’s wrong with you?’ he asked.

‘There’s a big ship anchored out in the bay just below
your house, full of men with dark uniforms and high caps.’

‘That’s so,’ said my father. ‘It was due to come sooner
or later, and I fancy there won’t be many houses left in this
Island by evening.’

‘God’s everlasting help to us!’ cried she. “The news is
always getting worse, but we never touched bottom till it
came to losing our huts.’

We were all up in a second and off to the landing-place.

When I came on the scene the women gave me a job.
I was set to gathering stones with the rest of them. We

never rested till we had a ship’s load of them heaped up.
One of the women said that they surely had enough am-
munition now, and that something would have happened
by the time we’d shot it all off. ‘But I expect,’ said another
woman, ‘that the bullets will have killed us all first.’

‘Yerra! may you die as they died in the Doon! Won’t
you be better off dead than lying in a ditch, thrown out of
your cabin?’

A big boat crammed with men put out from the ship’s
side, and when they came inshore they were astounded to
see the vast gathering above the harbour. They had ex-
pected that every living soul would have hidden in terror.
And no wonder! for every one of them had a gun ready
in his hand. But these women weren’t a bit afraid of them.

The men went off and the women gathered round, every
one of them with a chunk of rock in her hand. The men
in the boat didn’t know what to make of it when they saw
the women standing their ground, and they slowed up as
they came in to shore. At last they ran the nose of the boat
on the rock, two of them standing in the prow with nothing
to do but keep their guns levelled at anybody who should
lift a hand against them. As soon as the first man left the
boat, a woman flung a great stone down that came near to
knocking him off his feet. He glanced up at the cliff and
pointed his gun at them, but not a woman stirred. They
kept their ranks unbroken above the harbour. Soon a
woman threw another stone, and then another, and
another, till they made the whole beach echo with the
clatter. No more men got out of the boat, but they had to
make haste and take the man they had put on land aboard
again, and clear off out to sea as hard as they could. Two
other boats coming in met them, and they held a consulta-
tion. Then those boats drove into the creek in a furious rage.
They ran the stern of their boats hastily on the rock and
landed their men; but all the same the stones showered


down on them, and one of their men was struck on the
crown of his head and laid out flat at their feet. It was a
light stone, for une of the little lasses had flung it. He’d
have been a dead corpse if it had been one of the strong
women who had thrown it!

The captains commanded them to get back into the
boats at once. They did so—though they were delayed by
having to take the half-dead man with them. The three
boats, full of armed men, stood by for a time to talk it over,
and the result of the talk was that they came to make
another attempt, for they thought that the women had
shot off all their ammunition. But the boys had gathered
another pile of stones, and they began to cast them down
again, and, though there was a danger that the armed
men might fire on the women, they weren’t a bit afraid.
They felt less fear than they inspired.

There were five women standing to one side, and they
hadn’t enough stones to throw. One of them was carrying
a fat lump of a boy in her arms, and think how angry or
frantic she must have been when she couldn’t find any-
thing else in her neighbourhood to throw at the two police
who were trying to make their way up a grassy slope below
~—‘Devil take my heart,’ said she, ‘I’ll fling the child at
them! —

‘Yerra, you cursed fool,’ said the woman next to her,
‘don’t lose your wits; stick to the child.’

She had swung the child to throw it when the other
woman gripped it. In that moment a woman had come up
on the other side and flung a lump of sod down that sent
the two tumbling over. The child that was so nearly
thrown is strong and well over in America to-day.

The ship cleared off with all its crew that day without
taking a copper penny with them.

When the report got abroad that a steamship had been
in the Great Blasket with armed men aboard, and that


they had failed to get either rent or tax, it set all Ireland

wondering. Things stayed quiet for some time. A few

years later another ship of the same kind moored below

the houses. There were some civilian people in her and a

few men with guns. The Islanders had been warned that

something of the kind was coming, and that the best thing

they could do, probably, was to let them have their way

and to drive all the cattle and sheep to the western end of
the Island. So they did. The lads drove them as far as they

could. The sheriff was in the ship with all his officers, They

were not interfered with, but the Islanders gave them rope

to do their business. Off they went up the hill, the bailiffs

and the police in a bunch. The sheriff went as far as the -
Tower and found nothing. He sent a number of them half-

way across the Island, but it was just the same. They found

two old mules with nothing alive in them but their eyes.

The sheriff was asked if he wanted to take the mules with

him. He wouldn’t take them, for he was afraid that the

people would make a joke of him, he said. They went

home as they came—without cow, horse, or sheep.

One cold winter’s night Bald Tom strolled into our
house, as was his way. There was a great fire of turf blazing
up the chimney, and, as the house was a small one, it was
hot enough indoors, however cold it was without. The
crop-eared man had come before I had time to get clear
of the house. The other young people had gone visiting:
that was an old custom, and our young people keep it up
still. ‘If you had any sense,’ said my mother, ‘you’d stay
at home and not be off to those bare houses without fire and
warmth, and you’ll have plenty of entertainment with your
father and Bald Tom,’ said she.

It wasn’t this advice from my mother that was the chief
check on me, but I was passionately fond of Tom’s tales,
and that’s why I chose to stay and listen to him. The first
thing the two began to talk about was the ship on fire.


‘Well, Tom,’ said my father, ‘we had to sweat pretty
hard that day when the ship was on fire.’

‘We had,’ said Tom. ‘Two of our crew nearly died when
they stopped rowing.’

‘We might have known,’ said my father, ‘since the ship
was moving, that there was something driving her and that
she wasn’t on fire at all, as there was no wind and she had
no sails up, and we were following in our boats rowing our
guts to catch her, without getting any nearer.’

‘That was the first steamship to come this way, and we
thought she was on fire, so off we went after her,’ said Tom.
‘She was going to Limerick with Indian grain.’

‘Boats came out from Dunquin and Ballyferriter as she
went north,’ said my father.

‘Was it long after that that the fat bullocks came ashore?’
asked my father.

‘Just a year after, in the spring, a week before St.
Patrick’s Day,’ said Tom.

‘Weren’t there a lot of them washed ashore, perfectly
whole?’ said my father.

‘Nobody knows how many,’ said Tom. ‘There were
twelve barrels of salted meat in a single house in Fearann in
Ballyferriter parish.’

“We made least out of them, I think,’ said my father.

“Yes, and there was a reason for that—the weather was
stormy and the men couldn’t go out to fetch sait. But,
however ill provided they were, the man that had least got
a year’s meat. I had more than a year’s supply, though I
went shortest of all, as I had no salt. I fancy you had
enough of it to pay your rent, Donal?’

‘I had four barrels, brim-full, cured and salted,’ said my
father. ‘That was a great year for potatoes, and fish, too.’

‘Every man in our boat made thirty pounds,’ said Tom.

“Wasn’t it in one of those years that the Nora Creena
came, Tom?’


‘The year after. Not a single pound was made that year,
for the rascals in the old hulk seized every fish in the Island,
and I’ve no doubt that somebody’s curse fell on them when
the bottom dropped out of the ship at Edge Rock as she
was going back to Dingle full of fish?’

‘O! the curse of everybody in the Island was on them,
I fancy,’ said my father.

‘It was,’ said Tom, ‘and God’s curse, too, and it fell on
them all right.’

‘How do you make that out?’ said the other. ‘You know
not a soul of them was drowned when the bottom dropped
out of their old tub. What was it saved them?’

‘A great big boat they had tied to her, and when the
water came spouting up they all went into her,’ said Tom.

‘But how else did God’s curse fall on them, then?’ said
my father.

‘Like this,’ said Bald Tom. ‘Some forty of them came to
this Island in the days of the persecution to collect rent,
and not one of them died in his own house except one man
who lived out there in Coumeenole. They all died in want
in the poorhouse; and that was only just. Thanks be to
God that they are all dead and we are alive still.’

‘John Hussey was the first honest man that came to col-
lect the rent,’ said my father.

‘And a very straight man he was, too,’ said Tom. “He
never took a penny too much off any man from the first
day that he got the job.’

‘That’s true, Tom, but he often made trouble enough
for people doing work for him. Boats had to go with him
to cut seaweed and gather mussels for manure and to shear
sheep without pay, and on bad food—a lump of yellow
bread three days old and a mug of thin sour milk with the
cream gone from it two days ago. And since the people
survived him, and he didn’t drown them, their luck will
be in for good,’


‘O! the curse of the twenty-four men rest on him!’ said
the small-eared man. ‘He came near to losing a boat that
I was in, rowing north through the tide with a load of black
weed to Keel Harbour. The tide was too strong and the
boat too deep in the water, but two good men in her threw
overboard five or six horse-loads of the weed.’

‘He took two boats’ crews of us to Inishvickillaun to
shear sheep,’ said my father. ‘We spent three days shearing
them. The man in charge of the rock had brought some
wreckage ashore, and we had to take the wreckage east to
Beal Dearg.’

I never noticed the night slipping by as I listened to the
two of them talking things over after this fashion.
7. My Last School

THE OLD SOLDIER AS TEACHER «: THE INSPECTOR
COMES TO SEE HIM: MYSELF AS A TEACHER»
HUNTING RABBITS

One fine Sunday a boat came in from the land with
strangers in it. Nobody knew who they were, and the
people gathered above the harbour. It was a big, lanky,
lean fellow, with a sickly aspect. He looked old, too. He
was married and had his wife with him and two children.
The woman had three legs—a working leg, a short one,
and a wooden leg. People began to snigger on this side and
on that, and someone said:

‘They may be pretty miserable, but look what fine
children they have.’

‘That’s the will of God, man,’ said another man,
answering him—a man who knew the points of the Faith
better.

They reached the schoolhouse. That house was divided
into two, to lodge the teachers. The people brought them
plenty of turf, and they settled in to begin their work. He
was an old soldier who had stopped a bullet or two in the
Army, and he had sixpence a day pension. He couldn’t
lace up his boots or stoop at all because of the bullet in his
thigh. They were a wretched pair, not that I’m throwing it
up against them ; but the three-legged woman was a bit the
better of the two, for she’d get to the town quicker than any
two-legged woman, for she stepped along fine with her
stick.

The school had been closed nearly a year at this time,
and it was opened on the Monday. Nobody was absent that
day. A new teacher, you know! The old people could
hardly keep themselves from going to see how the new


man got on. School-teachers were few and far between in
those days, and the priest hadn’t been able to find any-
body, and, as he thought the school had been closed too
long, he sent this man in for a while. He had never been in
any college and hadn’t done too well in the elementary
school, either. However, study began in the morning on
Monday.

The King was waiting for me on his stool exact to the
minute. He beckoned to me to sit next to him, and I did
so. He whispered to me:

‘Hasn’t the old chap got a pitted skin?’

‘He’s pretty well pocked,’ said I. My father had told me
that they were the marks of smallpox, but at that time of
his life the King didn’t know what smallpox was at all.

The rabble at school didn’t acquire much learning that
day, for they weren’t attending to papers or books, but
staring at the three-legged woman, who showed herself
now and again. The teacher was a decent man, and we
weren't as frightened of him as we should have been of a
bad-tempered man. Anyhow the scholars behaved very
well with him.

Once a quarter he used to go to the town and bring
back a box of sweets and some apples to the scholars. If a
child stayed at home any day, he would go to visit him
with an apple or a sweet, and the child would go with him
gladly, crunching a lump of an apple like a horse. He had
such a kind way with him that few of the children missed
a day of school.

This was the last teacher I had, and the King, too, and
a lot of others, for he spent a good time in the Island. It was
ill health that drove him out at last. He started for Cork,
but he died on the way, poor fellow, near Tralee. There
was little learning in him that we hadn’t picked up before
he went.

Though the master had a lean, swarthy countenance,
My Last School 61

you would have thought that it wasn’t the same man at all
one day that an inspector came in at the door. There was
a slight flush in his face such as you would see in a man who
wasn’t quite right in his head, and I’m inclined to think
he was a bit that way then, whatever else was troubling
him. I certainly didn’t blame him for the change that
came over him when the fellow entered, for the whole
crowd in the school shuddered at the sight of him. He had
such a thick, yellow hide on him that you would have
imagined that he was cradled in some part of China.
Every one of us, little and big, had nothing to say and
went on quietly with whatever work we were doing. Before
long the master came up to me with some figures on a
slate and told me to cast them up as quick as I could.
That was a soft job for me, and I soon had it done. The
inspector had set him the task, and he was so confused
that he couldn’t make the sum out at all.

As the teacher was in bad health, the fright the inspector
gave him made him ill, though the school was open every
day. He said that he would be eternally grateful to me if I
would take his place in the school, with the King to help
me. His wife was a dressmaker, and she came to my mother
and told her to say a word in my ear and urge me to take
the school so long as the master was ill. ‘And if you have
a quilt or anything else to make, [ll make it for you,’
said she.

The King and I were a couple of teachers for a month,
and—keep it dark—-we were a pretty poor couple, for,
whatever we might have done, the misfortune and the
mischief kept us from doing it. There were a lot of sturdy
young things in the Blasket school in those days, and they
paid more attention to playing pranks and courting than
to making themselves experts in learning. Anyhow we got
through the month in this fashion, free of all trouble and
care.


Soon after that the teacher died. The school was shut up
again and the King and I were together once more, free
to follow the chase on hill or sea. If I had a touch of the
spoilt child in me still because I was the last of the litter,
the King was the same way, because he was the first of the
litter. For that reason we were free to do almost anything
we liked, good or ill.

One morning he came to me very early.

‘You had some reason for coming so early,’ said my
mother to him.

‘We'll go hunting,’ said he. ‘It’s a very fine day. We'll
run from here to Black Head, and maybe we'll get half a
dozen rabbits. Where’s Tom? Asleep still, I expect.’

‘That’s just what he is,’ said she.

‘Here I am, my lad,’ said I, for I knew his voice better
than the voice of any of the visitors to our house.

‘Jump up and we’ll be off hunting,’ said he.

‘But I’ve nothing any good for hunting with,’ says I.

‘We have, my boy,’ said he. ‘I'll bring the ferret with me.’

‘But I’m afraid they won’t let you have her,’ said I.

‘I'll steal her from my grand-dad.’

My mother gave me my breakfast, and I wasn’t long
gulping it down, and what I couldn’t take at a gulp, I had
a good mill to grind it down with—a slab of bread made of
coarse Indian meal, hard enough for a horse, a scad, and
water mixed with milk.

Off we went, the two of us. He stuffed the ferret down
his chest. We had two good dogs, and I carried a spade on
my shoulder. We made up the hill at our best pace. When
we came near the rabbits, we found a warren. The King
pulled out his ferret, tied a string to her and sent her in.
Then he stretched a net over each of the holesin the warren.
Soon a rabbit rushed out and, the net caught him at once.
That settled him, for there was a running cord to it that
made a pocket of it.

He picked him out of the net, and set it again as it had
been before. That was no sooner done than another rabbit
dashed out at another hole. The ferret didn’t come back
till she’d sent out the last of them to us. The ferrets always
come out when they can’t find any more. Seven fine
rabbits had been hunted out of the hole to us by the ferret
and caught in the nets. Off we went to another hunting
ground some distance away. The King sent the ferret in,
and she stayed in a bit before anything came out. At last
a big strong rabbit dashed out through the hole. The net
caught him, but he pulled up the peg that held it, and
off he went down the hill, but our two dogs soon caught
him up.

When the evening was growing late and the sun sinking
westwards, the King spoke:

‘We'll never be able to carry the rabbits home for
hunger,’ said he.

‘I never saw a man of so strong a make as you so quickly
overcome by hunger as you always are,’ said I, ‘and if we
don’t get any more, Pll carry the lot home.’

We'd killed a dozen and a half by this time—a fair
load—and we were thinking of turning our faces home-
wards. I had a coat with a big inside pocket and a large
hunk of bread in the pocket. It wasn’t I that put it there,
but my mother. She thought, I suppose, that the day is so
long and young people have good appetites, and she was
right, too.

I pulled it out, tore it in two, and gave half to the King.
Kings weren’t as hard to satisfy in those days as they are
to-day. He crunched it down with great satisfaction, and
it tasted good to him, for there wasn’t enough of it for
him, When he’d chewed it all up, he felt himself strong
again, and he put the ferret into one hole after another till
we had a dozen rabbits apiece when we came home with
the stars shining over us.
8. Marriage

OUR FAMILY SCATTERED: THE HUNTERS WHO
WERE CARRIED OFF TO BELFAST: PATS HEAMISH
IN DINGLE + THE DYESTUFF ON THE PETTICOATS

My sister Kate married and went to live in a little house
in the village. Her husband was a good fisherman. I often
held him down under water with an oar whenever we
wanted crabs for bait. I kept him under too long one day.
He was at his last breath when he came to the surface, and
his face was blue. He never trusted himself to me again.

The house Kate went to was just like the one she left—
with eggs in the roof, too. Pats Heamish was her husband’s
name, for his father was called Big James. Pats had a fancy
for joining the Army before he married, but his father used
to say to him: ‘Pats, my boy, think of the load on top of
you!’—reminding him that he’d have to carry a bit of a
burden, When the country people used to brawl and fight
at the markets and fairs, Big James was captain of one of
the factions, for he came from Ballyferriter to this Island.
They were good enough at rough work, but they weren’t
handy. Kate used to climb on to.the roof after the hens’
nests there, for she had the trick of it, and would just as
soon look for them there as in the coop.

I must leave them now to rub along together till my
story brings me back to them again.

My brother Pats married the year after Kate. His wife
was a girl from Dunquin, a weaver’s daughter. They had
two boys by the time she died. The youngest was only
three months old and my mother had to set about bringing
him up when she’d finished with her own clutch. Maura
was still in America, and Nora and Eileen were at home.
Maura meant to stay across the water till the other two

joined her, and so it fell out, for in a very short time she
sent them the passage-money. They went off in the same
year. As soon as she saw that they had their eyes open in
the New World, she began to think of moving, for her boy
was still in Ireland, and she wanted to get his rights for
him, and her own rights too, and to have the law of the
uncle who had turned them out. She reached the Blasket
at the end of harvest, having nearly a hundred pounds
with her. No sooner had she reached home than she set
the Jaw in motion, and by the time she’d done with the
uncle—her husband’s brother—he wasn’t worth much.
She got something herself, and the money that was
adjudged to the son was put in the bank. Before long the
bee stung her, and she began to think of marrying again.
A tight young fellow, stout and strong, was the man she
chose, with nothing in the world but his clothes, and they
not too good. They built a tiny little new house for them-
selves and jogged along like anybody else. The young
fellow was a good fisherman, and, as for her, she could live
where a rabbit could—like all the rest who had seen
America or spent any time there.

Not long afterwards the bee stung my brother Pats, and
before anybody knew where he was, he was half-way across
to America, leaving the two young ones to my mother.
My father was well on in years, and there was nobody left
now for them to count on to keep the little house going but
the spoilt child—myself.

You see how soon we were scattered! The merriment,
the jokes, the fun that never ceased—before meals, at
meals, and after meals—it was all gone now, and not a
sound was to be heard but the voice of the old hag
opposite and the droning of Bald Tom: but, ‘it was some
comfort that even they were there’, as the man said of
Cuan Croumha.

‘Wisha, God’s blessing on the souls of your dead! said


my mother to Tom one night. ‘Have you the tale to tell of
the hunters from the Island who were taken to Belfast?’

‘That’s a strange question to ask me, considering that
my father was mixed up in that affair,’ said Tom.

‘Wisha, God bless you!’ said she.

‘He was, I tell you. He spent a fortnight away from
home in misery. I was a little chap in those days, but I
remember perfectly that I couldn’t believe it was my own
father when he came back. There was a boat’s crew of
them that went as far back along the Island as the Mullach
Rour one fine, sunny day in a boat to hunt rabbits. They
left the boat in a creek there and went after the rabbits on
the hill. Before long they saw a ship coming through the
Sound from the north, and she looked as though there was
something wrong with her. They hurried down to their
boat and went on board; and they’d have done better to
stay where they were. It appears that the captain had a
very short crew. He was a thorough rascal, and looked it.
No sooner had they left their boat and gone on deck than
he seized a gun and pointed it at them. He flung the
Island-boat’s rope into the sea and let her go with the
tide, and prevented them from getting into the boat to go
home. He forced them to hoist all his sails for him, and the
night blew up into a violent gale. He carried them as far
as the north of Ireland—as far as he was going himself, and
if he’d been going farther, he would have taken them
farther, too.

‘He lodged them in an inn there, and ordered the
hostess to have them there when he came back or she’d
hear about it. One of them left the others by stealth—Big
James’s father—and no man that ever travelled through
Ireland suffered as he did, without a shoe to his foot or any
clothes to speak of, but hunger and cold vexing him and
terror on the top of that, he was so afraid of being arrested
from moment to moment. When the captain was ready he

had them charged in court and condemned. They didn’t
understand what was going on, and nobody understood
them, for they had no English, only Dunlevy’s father knew
a word or two. They would have gone to jail if it hadn’t
been for a gentleman who stood their friend. He heard all
the talk going on as he passed the court-house, and he
asked a youngster in the doorway what all the row was
about. He told him what it was and where the men had
come from. The gentleman was a captain in the Army,
a native of Kerry. He went in at once to where they were,
and, with the gentleman’s help, the whole truth about the
villainous captain was explained to the judge. He was
condemned to pay down forty pounds on the table and the
value of the boat he’d destroyed, ten pounds more.

‘The man who had started out first was forced to walk
all the way from the north, and he wasn’t worth much
when he reached the Island. He was a poor man with a
large family, and, once the fear was upon him, he had no
choice but to bolt as soon as he got the chance. I often
heard my father say that the whole lot of them would have
done as he did if it hadn’t been that they agreed among
themselves that their only chance of escape was to stand
fast, though the captain would have been just as pleased if
they’d all gone off. Although he told the landlady to keep
them fast when he was speaking in front of them, he told
her a different story behind their backs: to let them go if
they showed any sign of escaping, for all he wanted was to
get off paying them any wages; and he came very near to
winning the trick.’

‘Wisha, long life to you!’ said my mother, who had been
listening to the tale as eagerly as anybody.

Before we knew, Pats came in at the door, back from
America, with nothing but his clothes, and poor clothes at
that. I fancy somebody else had lent him the money to
buy even them. We expected that he’d stay to keep us


company for the rest of his life, but expectations are often
disappointed, and that’s how it was with Pats. The very
next spring came a call from across the water for himself
and his two children, He answered the call at once. He
took up the little one, who could only just walk, in his
arms, and kept him there till he got across. The other boy
was strong enough, Pats started in to pay their way and
his own, working hard every day, and he spent ten years
thus. After all those years, though he’d never had so much
as a headache or missed a single day’s work, he hadn’t
saved a single pound. He was a tall, spare man, who had
a passion for work, and he could do as much work as two
men, That’s the reason he was never in want of work for
a day all the time he was in America. Of course, men were
unemployed often enough in that period of time, but the
ganger used to keep the best man to the last, and that was
always Pats’s lot.

Three of the family were at home now and three over-
seas. The old pair had to look to the pet now when there
were only the three of us in the cabin. I was a good twenty
years old at this time, and we did very well for some time.
I used always to do marketing in Dingle, going sometimes
by land and sometimes through the whole length of
Dingle Bay. Occasionally we had pigs with us, or fish, or
sheep, and so on, and now and again a bullock or a load
of wool, On my first visits there I used to surprise the other
men when I named the houses, for the sign outside told me
who lived there.

I was in Dingle one day with Pats Heamish, my sister’s
husband, and we kept together all day long. He was the
sort of man that couldn’t keep a glass of whisky or a pint
of porter long between his hands without pouring them
down him, and he never enjoyed the taste of anything he
paid for with his own money, but liked it well when
another man jogged him in the back to have one with him.

The upshot of it all was that the drink got the upper hand
of him entirely that day and made a complete scatterbrain
of him. It didn’t leave a stim of sense in him any more than
he had on the day he first began to crawl after leaving the
cradle. And since I hadn’t had the luck to leave him before
he went right out of his mind, I couldn’t clear out now
and leave him under the horses’ bellies. Late in the evening
we were in Main Street. There were crowds of people
sauntering up and down, and some of them would come
up to us now and then, acquaintances of ours, to welcome
us in from the Island. He turned nasty at last.

‘Where’s this gang of devils from?’ he kept saying.
‘Talk’s the best part of you. It isn’t as easy to get a drink
out of you. And your poor friends here parched with
thirst!’

Sure enough he was telling the truth, but what was the
good! The truth itself is bitter sometimes. It gave me a
stitch in the heart to listen to his pointless babble, but
what could I do but keep it to myself. Every now and then
a brace of peelers would come our way, and I’d cheer up,
thinking that they’d take him by the ear and relieve me of
him, and put him safe somewhere till he recovered his
senses. But so long as he saw them in the neighbourhood
you’d take your oath that he was a parish clerk, he’d
behave himself so well till they were clean out of sight. But
the moment the King’s men had cleared off, up would go
his hat in the air and he’d be the merriest man in the street
again. Some fellow would come up and let on to fetch him
a clout, but Pats would give him a kiss.

Well, things were very well and not so bad; and bad as
a man’s case is sometimes, things can be worse often
enough, and oddly though I spent the day with the rascal,
the worst of all was yet to come. He shoved his hand in his
pocket and pulled out his pipe, with its clay bowl, and
nothing in it but chalk.


‘Holy Mary! I haven’t a thread of tobaccy,’ said he.
‘Come into this big shop here—they’ve got good tobaccy.’

‘Yerra, we can get good tobaccy in the shops on our way
home,’ said I to him. ‘Don’t trouble about this one.’

‘If I was there I should be coming back here after the
good tobaccy they keep in this shop,’ said he.

There’s not a living soul that would say that he had a
drop of drink in his body while he was jabbering about the
tobacco, I knew that he wouldn’t listen to a word I said,
and off we went across the street. The big shop was a
branch of a company from another part—Atkins’s—selling
all sorts of goods. It was a fine, handsome shop. There was
a model of a woman standing on a chair between the two
counters facing the doorway, as bulky as any woman of the
countryside. When my man was coming through the door,
he swept off his hat in greeting to the woman!

‘Good day, Mrs. Atkins!’ says he.

Ever since the days of the great famine no speech has
caused so much laughter in Dingle as that. There wasn’t
a man from anywhere in the shop that didn’t drop stone-
dead, every one of them, writhing with laughter, shopmen
and masters alike, when they heard what the fool said. If
there had been the faintest trace of too much drink on him,
none of them would have given a thought to what a man
in that state said or did; but he showed no sign of it.

Night was coming down on us by this time, and the rest
of the Islanders in the town were making their best speed
home, but it was no good telling him that; he would
sooner have gone east than west, and, in fact, that’s the
way he should have gone, for it was the way to the mad-
house, and that was the best place for him that day.

When we left the big shop they were lighting the lamps,
and we hadn’t gone far when he said:

‘I can’t go any farther, Tom,’ says he.

‘Yerra, what’s wrong with you now?’

‘Pm dropping with hunger, and I’m thirsty, too.’

‘Sure I thought nobody suffered from the two plagues at
once.’

“Well, ‘pon my soul, I’ve got them both now!”

I carried him off with me to a place where we could get
something to eat. I thought they hadn’t enough food for
him in the house, but they had. What he ate wouldn’t have
kept a rat going. He went to bed, and nobody knew
whether he was alive or dead till ten o’clock next morning,

When I got back home, after three days away because of
Pats Heamish—Pats, the devil’s own (God forgive me for
calling him that)—there was a lot of wreckage afloat round
the Island—all sorts of flotsam, timber and huge boxes
full to the brim. Nobody recognised the stuff in the boxes
when they broke them open. They kept breaking them up
and carrying them home after throwing away all their
contents.

When the Islanders saw that they could make no use of
the goods in the boxes, they let the sea carry them past
when anything else came their way. The women wore
black flannel petticoats in those days, and they used to
dye them with woad. They used to dip them first before
they put the dark dye-stuff on them, and, only think! one
of the housewives who had two petticoats to dip, got the
idea of using the stuff in one of these boxes her husband
brought for the first dipping. She had noticed that a colour
came out of the stuff when it was damped. When once she
had the idea, she carried it out, and it was a complete
success, for no colouring matter ever went so deep into a
petticoat as that did. She showed what she had done to
one woman after another, and she’d no cause to be
ashamed, for she had done the trick properly.

‘What a godforsaken man I have!’ said a railing woman
who saw the petticoats prepared for the dye. ‘He never
brought a grain of it to the house for me, and I have had


two petticoats in the house for three months with nothing
to ready them for dyeing. I wouldn’t give much for him
when once I get my hands on him.’

‘For heaven’s sake,’ says the other woman to her, ‘let
him alone.’

The woman hadn’t been home long when her man came
down from the hill carrying a huge sack of turf.

‘Devil take it, Joan! I’ve strained every sinew in my
back,’ says he. He thought that she would sympathize with
him, you see, but she did the other thing.

‘Sorrow on the day, I wish it had put your thigh out?
says she. ‘For it’s a long day before you'd bring a richer
sack than that to my kitchen.’ And her eyes were blazing
as she said it.

‘Yerra, I can’t remember when I left outside any sack
that was worth bringing home,’ says he.

‘Yerra, you devil, didn’t you leave the stuff in the boxes
behind you, and it would have readied the petticoats,’
says she, ‘I’ve had waiting for it these three months.’

‘You’re in a temper, little woman,’ says he.

‘And no wonder, when she’s got three great boxes of it in
that house over there and I haven’t a pinch I could throw
to the chickens,’ says she.

‘It’s no matter what you have or haven’t, for you’re
clean beside yourself,’ says her husband.

‘O! ill luck to you, and ill luck is what you have and
anybody that’s near you!’ says she; ‘and lop the ears off
me if the man who brought home those boxes doesn’t get
the fruit of them; surely such fine boxes never had bad
stuff in them—each box lined all round inside with lead
as bright as a shilling.’

The husband was a fine, easy-going man, but, when she
put him in a passion, he went for the railer.

One day in the next week this woman visited the woman
who had dyed the petticoats again; and they were still

perfect. She had another story to tell about the stuff, and
another use she was making of it—she had two ravenous
pigs that were dying of hunger, and since she’d started
boiling the stuff for them, mixed with a handful of meal,
they lay at their ease, belly-upwards, in the yard, ‘And
pretty soon they’ll be fine and fat,’ says she.

‘Wisha, ruin and decay on the man that never brought
home a grain of it,’ says the railing woman, ‘and I have
two famishing pigs ready to eat the children for hunger—
all skin and bone though they’re nearly a year old.’

‘Yerra,’ says the other woman, ‘since the thing’s done
now, don’t give it away that you mind.’

When this villain of a woman got home, she was spoiling
for a fight, and grudged every minute till her husband
came home. She dressed him up and down.

*Yerra,’ says he, Tm not the only man, by a long chalk,
that threw it away.’

‘Devil a one except some fool like yourself,’ says she.

She made him so savage in the end that the neighbours
had to come and separate them.

Next morning the husband bestirred himself. He pre-
tended that he was going to Dingle to get meal for the
pigs. He borrowed bits of clothes from this man and that,
and never stopped till he reached the town.

Some relations paid his fare, and he’s never come back
since.

The stuff in those boxes was tea—the first that ever
came to the Island. We should know it well enough now.
g. Gathering Seaweed

THE SEAL ON THE BEACH: THE FIGHT: KILLING
THE SEAL: THE WOUND IN MY LEG: FETCHING
THE CURE

One morning, I remember, I set my face to the shore. It
was the season when we were getting seaweed for manure.
I was bright and early, and had a fine, new fork with me
for gathering any handful of weed that should come my
way. When I came to the cliff above the strand, I leant
with my breast against a little round-topped fence there,
but there wasn’t light enough to see anything from the top,
and, that being so, I made my best speed down till I came
to the pebbles. There was a little weed lying high and dry
all along the line of the high tide, and I heaped it together
with my fine new fork. I was by way of being rather set up
with myself to think that I had done that much good work
while the rest were asleep, but I fancy that kind of con-
ceit never lasts a man long—and that’s how it was with
me, too.

After a bit I heard a hideous snore behind me, a queer
sort of snoring that frightened me out of my wits, for there
was nobody near me, and nobody coming towards me, and
there wasn’t much light in the morning yet. But I reflected
that I should be a poor sort of chap, now that the day
was coming, if I didn’t go in the direction the snore was
coming from, since I had a good weapon in my hand. No
sooner was the word out of my mouth than I heard snore
after snore. I swung round in a jiffy to where I heard them
coming from, and what should I see but a huge great
mottled seal, with his head in the air and the rest of his
body stretched out on the sand. My heart leapt, though not
for fear of the seal, for I knew that he could not do me any

harm so long as I kept away from him and let him be. But
the fear I had was that I shouldn’t get him, for we thought
more of one of them in those days than of the very finest
pig. He stretched himself out to sleep again.

I saw now that it was a cow seal, and I plucked up
courage, for I had always heard that it was an easier
matter to kill seven of them than one of the bulls. She was
lying at the edge of the water, and it was low tide. I looked
to my fork while she was sleeping. I held the iron socket in
my hand, with the handle stretched out in front of me, and
started creeping up to her to fetch her a blow; but she lifted
her head as though she had scented me, and gave vent to
a loud, wild snort, and began to stir and to leave the nest
she had made in the pebbles. As she turned towards the
sea, I gave her a blow, six blows one after the other, but
she paid no more attention to any of those blows with the
haft than ifit had been this pen in my hand that had struck
her: and with one of them I broke the haft of the fork in
two. I gave her a whack across the snout with the bit left
in my hand, but she caught it in her mouth and chewed it,
and made bits of it. All I had then was a stalk of the weed,
and I showered blows on her with that as fast as I could,
but I was doing her no harm, only that I was hindering
her from getting to the water, which was not far from
her by this time. In the end, when I was worn out, and
she was, too, I managed to bang her on the top of the
head with a lump of rock from the shore, and the blow
turned her belly upwards, but she soon came to her senses
again.

At last I thought she was dead, and I was still whacking
away at her with a stalk of weed, when, what do you think?
I went too close to her, and she had a shot at taking a bite
out of me. And she managed it, too! She bit a huge lump
out of my calf. As much as her four front teeth could get
a grip of—all that she tore out of my leg. I didn’t give in,

though blood was flowing out of it in torrents, just as it was
out of the seal.

Well, I'd finished the seal at last, and the seal had pretty
nearly finished me, too, and it was like to be my last day
when I looked closely at my leg and saw the lump out of it
and the fountain of blood spurting. The last drop had near-
ly left my heart; I had to strip off my little vest and twist
it round my leg, binding it with the cord from my waist.
The water was coming up with the rising tide and the seal
was not far from the edge, so that I was terrified that the
sea would carry her off again from me after all my trouble;
there was not a soul coming next or nigh me. It was the
middle of the morning by now, and, as I thought the
thing over, I cast a glance now and again at my leg, which
was spouting a stream of blood.

At last, when my strength was nearly gone, I saw a man
on the crest of the cliff, and he came down to me at full
speed. It was an uncle of mine that we used to call Mad
Diarmid. He was astounded, and said that he had never
seen a seal of that size dead before.

‘I’ve got the seal, uncle,’ I said, ‘but I’ve lost my leg.’

He staggered and nearly fell when he saw the great bite
out of the leg. One man after another came down to us
soon after that, and we carried the seal out of reach of the
high tide and came home. My mother and father were in
a terrible state when they saw the great hole in my leg, and
they got little satisfaction out of the seal since the boy who
had killed it hadn’t got off with a whole leg. A crowd of
them went off to skin the seal, with Mad Diarmid to direct
them. My father didn’t go at all. He was beside himself on
account of my leg, but he sent the ass with Diarmid to
bring it home, and he told him to give a slice of it to each
man who helped in the skinning.

Old women were running in and out inquiring after my
leg, every one with her own remedy. The old woman

opposite came, too, quickly enough, and when she saw my
leg: ‘Yerra,’ says she, ‘there’s not a pin’s worth wrong
with the leg.’

When she said that, I give you my word I was very
grateful to her, for I thought it a better saying than the
talk of the rest of them, which was that I should lose the
leg. She said she had seen a bigger bite than that taken out
of a man’s leg by a seal in Inishvickillaun, and it didn’t
take a week for it to heal. Shaun Maurice Liam killed the
seal that had taken the lump out of his leg. His father
killed another seal, took a fresh piece of its flesh and placed
it on the wound, then he bound it with a strip of cloth, and
left it so for seven days. When he untied it, the hole had
filled up with the natural flesh, so said the old hag.

‘And how long after that was it before the skin grew on
it?’ said my mother.

‘The very day the strip was taken off he went for a walk
on the Island, without any covering on his leg, which was
left bare to the sun, and that same evening the skin had
grown on it,’ says she.

My mother looked out and saw Bald Tom coming with
a big lump of the seal on his back. One end of the lump
touched the nape of his neck and the other end was down
to his knee joint.

‘Here comes Tom, Eileen,’ says my mother to the hag.

She sprang up at a bound and ran out, and when she
saw the fine burden her man was bringing her, she
screamed with laughter. For a good while before that
she had had nothing but a grain of rough salt to eat with
her potatoes.

Then Diarmid came to the door with his ass, and no-
body had ever seen an ass so heavily laden before. All you
could see was his ears and his tail. All the rest was hidden
with heavy lumps of seal, and the driver himself was bent
down to the ground under his own load.


There was a loud burst of talking then, and, in the midst
of all the chatter, my mother said:

‘This lad will lose a leg by that seal, I’m afraid.’

‘That he won’t, believe me,’ says Diarmid, ‘since he
managed to kill the seal; if he hadn’t done that, he
wouldn’t have had much chance.’

Then mother told him what old Eileen had said.

‘That certainly did happen, *pon my soul,’ says he. ‘A
bit from another seal was put in the hole from which the
lump had been taken. And, my soul from the devil! by
this time to-morrow you shall have a lump from another
seal for your shinbone, my lad,’ says Wild Diarmid.

The Black Boar left the Blasket harbour on the morrow
morning, with a crew of eight, four oars, two sails, two
masts, and two yards. There was a strong gale blowing
hard from the north-east. She wasa fine, big, new boat, and
the crew knew their business. The sails were hoisted and
they let her go with the wind. One of the men followed her
along the hill with his pipe lit, and the boat was in
Inishvickillaun before the pipe was cold in his mouth.

The man who lived in the island thought that she was
a boat from a wreck or that half her crew were dead,
and he was waiting for them up to his waist in the water
of the creek, for there was a heavy swell running. He
asked them at once what had brought them on a day
like that.

‘This is what brought us,’ said Diarmid, telling his tale,
‘and we won't leave the island without something alive
or dead.’

‘*Pon my soul,’ says the man of the island, ‘you’ll have
your work cut out beyond anything you ever knew.’

The day was beginning to blow hard, and I was in and
out of the house, for my Jeg wasn’t sore or painful. Mother
was up and down, too, listening to the loud wind like a
hen with an egg, and after a bit she said:

‘I’m afraid the men at sea will have to pay dear for
their day’s work to save your leg.’

However much I was afraid for my leg, and at the
thought that maybe I should have to have a wooden leg,
I was more worried about the Black Boar and all her crew
at that moment.

The islandman took the men to his house and gave them
something to eat. When they had eaten, he called for some
of them to go with him to look for the seal. After they had
searched every cave in the island, they failed to find a
single seal. So they had to turn back home.

Diarmid went on terribly then, thinking that the boy
with the leg must die. The islandman said there was still
just one hole left, and that they would have to have
twenty fathoms of rope to go into it—‘and,’ says he, ‘I
have a rope here that I use for getting sheep out of bad
places.’

‘Where’s the rope?’ says Diarmid.

He flung the rope over his shoulder and off he went, and
the others with him. They lowered him down on the rope
with a stick under his oxter to kill the seal, and a knife in
his mouth. They paid out the rope till he was in the mouth
of the cave, and then lowered the islandman after him.

That was a fine action of theirs, and I was grateful to
them till the day they died. May their souls inherit the
Kingdom of the Saints!

They brought the seal up with them, and, when they
had him, the men said that no open boat could get home
in such a storm. Diarmid said if they would set the sails for
him, that she’d have to get back as she had come! Out they
drove, into the great sea, and Diarmid fetched Slea Head
on the first tack and the Blasket landing-place on the
second, and he never stopped till he’d stuck a lump of the
seal’s flesh tight into my leg, and, a week after, I was as well
as ever I was.
10. Time Passes

THE DAUGHTER OF THE WOMAN OPPOSITE:
SHROVETIDE +: PROPOSALS AND MARRIAGES >
DRIFTWOOD : THE DANGING-MASTER : THE MERRY

GENTLEMAN : THE POET DUNLEVY

One Sunday a boat came in from Dunquin with a lady in
it. Nobody recognized her till she was in their very midst.
Who should it be but the daughter of the woman over
the way. They kept on shaking hands with her till you
would have thought her arm would have been wrung
from her shoulder. She wore a picture hat, with a rakish
feather or so sticking up from it. A yellow chain of glittering
gold lay on her blouse. She carried a sunshade, and there
was a twang in her speech, no matter which brogue she was
talking—Irish or English. A box or two of all sorts came
with her, and, best of all, she had a purse of gold from the
States, for she was a master hand at putting it together.

It was impossible to know the good mare’s foal, of
course, for, though she was dressed up to the nines, there
wasn’t much more than the skeleton inside. She was never
much of a figure, and, after she had spent five years in
the land of sweat, she was uglier than ever.

A crowd followed her to their shanty. She had a bottle
of whisky with her, and, as it was mostly the old women
that went with her, it wasn’t long till they were singing the
old songs of Munster and praising the girl who had come
back with something for them. They spent the day without
a bite of food, for there was a taste of the drink for every
singer for every song she sang.

It went on like this till Shrove came, and not much of it
was gone before the Yank’s money was being hawked.
about. As the old woman had been matching her with me
THE LOWER VILLAGE, THE WHITE STRAND,
AND THE ROCKS OF THE ROAD

HOUSES OF THE LOWER VILLAGE WITH BEGINISH BEYOND
Time Passes 81

when we were little ones, I took it into my head that maybe
she’d start the same talk again, and no wonder as things
were now. It would have been strange if it hadn’t been so,
for she was a girl with gold, and girls of that kind were
few and far between in those days.

Before long, the grey woman, her mother, began to hint
to my mother about all the gold Mary had and how she
wanted to settle out on the mainland in some piece of land.
‘Her father and I would rather she stayed near us,’ says
she. ‘And if you like the idea, nobody’s keeping her from
you,’ says she again.

*Yerra, this is how things are,’ my mother said to her.
“Our boy’s young yet, and I fancy it’s not much use talking
about anything of that kind to him. I don’t think that he’s
very anxious to stay here, for maybe only himself and his
sister would be left here of all the clutch, and, if it hadn’t
been to please us, I fancy he’d have gone before this.’

**Pon my soul, then,’ says she, ‘he’s wrong there. Maybe
he’d be in America a long time before he met a girl as
good as she is.’

Early in Shrovetide Bald Tom went off to the mainland
and found out a man and a bit of land that wasn’t much
good—the grass of a cow or two in a poor shelterless place
that wouldn’t encourage anybody. He gave very little for-
tune for it, for he was asked only for a little.

When he had everything ship-shape, Tom turned home
and sent an invitation to the wedding to every house in the
village. The grey woman didn’t forget the house across the
way, and I went to the wedding, like the rest. There was
high feasting at every wedding in those days, all sorts of
food and ‘kitchen’ and a swarm of people to eat it. There
were eight barrels of porter there, and there wasn’t a drop
left in the bottom of one of them by morning.

When it was all over, everybody started for home. When
we reached the cliff above the harbour at Dunquin, the


gulls themselves couldn’t have left it: the swell was going
up over the green grass in every creek and cranny, and we
had to stay on the mainland that day and the next day
and the day after that again. We spent twenty-one days
altogether on land, if you please, and the day we went in
wasn’t too good. I fancy none of them blessed the wedding,
they were so sore about it. She lived there for some time,
and had four children before she died.

When we got home the Island was full of wreckage. ‘The
White Strand was covered with beams of red and white
deal, white planks, a fragment of a wrecked ship, a chair,
a stool, apples, and all sorts. The boat in which my father
worked got twelve baulks. Some of the others had more,
some less. The boat I was coming from the mainland in
came across a fine baulk in the middle of the Sound. We
had to use the sail rope to tow it, for we had no other rope
in the boat. After landing it, we set our faces to the sea
again. We came unexpectedly on two baulks next door to
one another. One of them was eighty feet long, and thick
to match. People said that it was the finest baulk that had
ever come ashore within living memory. We had no food
except a miserable potato or so in Dunquin that morning,
until the dark of night came, and by that time we had
saved eight baulks. But that was an unprofitable toil:
thirty shillings was all we got for the big fellow—in the
Great War that baulk would have fetched twenty pounds!

A dancing-master came on a visit to us for a time, and
he set up a dancing school for a month. Four shillings
apiece was his fee. The place he settled in was the old
monastery of the Soupers, that half of it in which the
school used to be in the old days. It had a plank floor which
made a great racket. The noise was the best part of the
proceedings—at first, anyhow. Not many put their names
down the first day, for few were in a position to pay.
Before long, however, they were coming to the school in


ones and twos. The teacher was a very good man, and had
no fancy for turning out blunderers at a wedding feast.
He had pocketed my four shillings, and I certainly got its
value pretty soon as far as dancing goes, for the house
where he lodged was near ours, and he used to give me a
lesson whenever I ran across him. Before long I was a
marvellous dancer—but, as always happens even to-day,
somebody came to stop him from teaching anyone else,
and the dancing school on the Island was put down.

A gentleman came on a visit to the Island soon after the
break-up of the dancing school and he started all sorts of
merry-making. Barret was his name. He had food and
drink of every kind, cold, hot, and boiled. He brought
eight bottles of whisky with him, and a variety of other
drinks as well. It was a question who should sing him the
first song, for they were shy till they saw that he had a good
bottle of whisky to give to the first singer. They needed no
pressure then, even those who hadn’t sung a song for
seven years or couldn’t sing at all! It was the same story
with the dancing; and the lilters got their glass, too!

The old women and the aged men danced also. I was
half-tipsy most of the time, for the old women and the
young girls would keep leading me out, as I was a fine
dancer in those days. My father could dance, and he had
been teaching me before the dancing-master came, The
old women in particular took me out on the floor with
them, and so I came home, half-seas over, every night all
that week. If any of them had any rest, I hadn’t, for I was
dancing and singing and lilting turn and turn about: I was
a clever fellow in those days!

Two boats from Iveragh were fishing lobsters that year.
They were living in a shanty in Beginish with an English-
man in their company. Though the poor fellows used to be
tired after the day’s work they would find their way to the
schoothouse every night, and one of them was the best


dancer that ever stood on a floor. He got plenty of glasses.
They had a lilter, too, and you’d prefer him to any instru-
ment of music.

The drink didn’t last the whole week, as he had thought
it would. He sent out a boat’s crew to the nearest place,
and fetched as much again. He must have remembered
that week as long as he lived, and so did everybody else who
had a share in the sport.

He sent a lot of presents to the Blasket after going home,
and a pound of tobacco to the poet Dunlevy. The poet
didn’t let him go unthanked, for he wrote a poem in praise
of him afterwards.

The next Shrovetide after this gentleman, Barret, had
left the Island, a marriage proposal came to the King from
Dunquin. He hadn’t the style of Xing at that time, but,
all the same, they were pretty well off. Probably he had
plenty of other proposals, for he was a fine man in those
days.

There was high feasting at the marriage, you may be-
lieve, for there were plenty there to make away with both
food and drink. When they were going home, a boat
turned bottom upwards in the Blasket creek. Two of the
crew were underneath her. When they got them free, they
were at their last gasp. Nursing mothers were milking their
breasts and giving them the milk in a spoon. But after
about an hour they took a turn for the better.

There were four other marriages in Dunquin the night
of the wedding in the King’s house, and the people of the
parish came near to destroying one another. Little wonder,
when you consider how much drink there was and all the
scandal which had been talked for years before which now
had a chance of venting itself. After the night’s medley six
of them had to be sent to hospital, and they didn’t get off
too lightly. One man had been hit with a bottle and an-
other with a stone. One of them got a wipe with the tongs,


like Owen Roe O’Suilivan when the woman hit him. Owen
died, but this one pulled through.

When I was a young man the poet Dunlevy was com-
posing his songs in the Island. The Island is a little place,
you know, and we were always running up against one
another every day in the year, in the houses or on the hill
or at sea.

One day I wanted to go and cut some turf, for it was a
very fine day, and we hadn’t much of the old turf left to
hand at that time. I went off through the door with a first-
rate turf spade all ready and sharp. And though, as far as
looks went, I was no match for the Fenians of old, nobody
could say a word against me for what I was—I was quick
and deft, and knew what was what.

Off I started up the hill, and my breath never came
short, my foot had no cramp, my hand didn’t shake, there
was no pain in my heart till I came to a place where,
thought I, there was good turf, and enough of it round me
to do my business. I was wild to get to work and do my job.
As I had no young folk in the house to bring me my dinner,
only the two old people, I took a good hunk of bread with
me in the morning—bread of coarse meal, very hard and
yellow, only whitened outside with flour, like whitewash
on a house wall; a pint bottle of milk from the cow, and a
lump of butter about the size of a small potato. And,
though no one has a word to say in favour of that sort of
food nowadays, I was pleased enough with it then, for I
had a mill in my mouth to grind it.

But I had little chance to turn my keenness for work to
profit that day. I hadn’t long begun on the job, working
hard, when the poet Dunlevy came up with a spade under
his oxter, to cut a bit of turf for himself; and there were a
lot of others with him who had come out to the bog as he
had, for it was a lovely day, and at that time there was
very little of last year’s turf that hadn’t been burnt.


I fancy that no poet has ever been much good at carry-
ing through any job that had any work in it except only
poetry, and that was the way with Shane, too. I can
produce some sort of evidence for this statement, for, when-
ever I take it in hand to compose quatrains (and I often
do) I shouldn’t be much use in a gang of workers or in the
field so long as I was engaged upon them.

‘Well,’ says the poet, throwing himself down on a tus-
sock, ‘isn’t it a pity for you to be cutting turf on such a hot
day. Sit down a bit, the day is long and it’ll be cool in the
afternoon.’

I didn’t care much for what he had to say, but I was
rather shy of refusing to sit down with him. Besides, I knew
that if the poet had anything against me, he would make
a satire on me that would be very unpleasant, especially as
I was just about coming out in the world. So I sat down
beside him.

‘Now,’ says the poet, ‘perhaps you haven’t got the first
poem ever I made. ‘“The Black-faced Sheep”, that was my
first, and I had good reason for making it as far as pro-
vocation goes.”

Would you believe it—he started to recite every word
of it, lying there stretched out on the flat of his back! There
was a hummock of soft heather under him, and the scorch-
ing heat of the sun was flaming down from the cloudless,
deep blue sky over our head, toasting the side of the poet
that was uppermost.

I praised the poem to the skies, though it was vexing me
sorely from another point of view—keeping me back from
the profitable work that I had promised myself that morn-
ing should be done. The poet had put a stop to that with
his babbling.

‘The poem will be lost,’ says he, ‘if somebody doesn’t
pick it up. Have you anything in your pocket that you
could write it down with?’

If a man isn’t in luck’s way in the morning and God’s
favour with him, the poor wretch can’t hope to do much.
The hapless Tom didn’t cut as much turf as would make
two loads for an old ass that day that he planned to do so
much. And that was one of the first days that I felt the
world going against me, for the fact is, for one day that
went well with me, five would go wrong for me from that
day out.

It wasn’t to oblige the poet that I fished out my pencil
and some paper I had in my pocket, but for fear he would
turn the rough side of his tongue to me. I set about scrib-
bling down the words as they came out of his mouth. It
wasn’t in the usual spelling that I wrote them, for I hadn’t
enough practice in it in those days.

T wasn’t too happy then; and no wonder: a man who
had a sensible bit of work on hand in the morning, and now
it was laid aside for a pointless job! When once he’d
opened his mouth, the poet had a jut on his jaw to send
his voice out. I scribbled away at the words as best I could
after a fashion that kept the poem more or less in my
memory, and, besides, if a word should drop out here and
there, the guide wasn’t far from me, ready and willing to
waste a bit of his life explaining it to me, even if the
plough-team were waiting for him in the furrow.

When the pair of us had done with one another, the sun
was sinking over the hill, and it was as much as Tom could
do to keep his wits together by that time. When the poet
had left me, the very first thing I did was to go to the
tussock at the side of which my dinner was, and the dinner
was utterly ruined: a horse couldn’t have champed the
hunk of yellow bread, and my milk had turned to stone in
the bottle!
11. My Manhood

THE BIG CATCH OF FISH: DEATH OF THE OLD
WOMAN OVER THE WAY: THE SIX GIRLS

Since it had come about that the poet had put me back
that day I meant to do so much, so that I hadn’t cut even
a load of turf, I fixed on another day for doing it. I didn’t
take any dinner with me this day, for my mother told me
that she would send a little girl to me with a bit of hot food.

So it was. I ran up the hill and caught up with two
others who were in the same hurry as I was. On our way
to the mountain one of them glanced out to sea, and what
should he see but a school of fish down below us near in to
the rock.

‘The devil!’ says he. ‘Look at all the fish shoaling!’ Off
with us homewards as fast as we could. A boat was launched
and the nets were thrown into her: and we never stopped
till we had made the spot where the shoal was. It was still
on the surface, just as it had been. We made a cast of the
net and rowed round the shoal. We took as much as our
boat would carry, and there was enough for another boat
still in the net.

We had to land a man on the rock to fetch another boat
from the harbour to bring the catch home. They pitched
on me to go home and get the crew of the other boat, and
—though I say it myself—it wasn’t easy to find my match
to get over the crest of the hill before me, When I reached
home, there weren’t many men to be got, for they were all
at their own jobs.

There was only one boat with a seine net in the Blasket
that year. All the rest were little boats. It was one of those
that I had to get ready, and two old men were the crew that
came in it with me. Well, we managed it all right, for it

was a very fine day. When we reached the seine boat, we
filled up the little boat with all she could take; but we were
as badly off as before, for the net wasn’t emptied yet. There
was another boatful of fish still in it. We werein a dilemma,
for there weren’t enough men to make up the crew of
another boat.

The shift we hit on was to send the little boat home with
its load to land the fish and come back again. So it was
done. She was given four oars and a man to steer her. And
it wasn’t long till she was back again. The net was heaped
into her, and she was full to the chin. Off went the two
boats together, both of them down to the gunwale. The
fish was May mackerel, every one of them as long as your
arm, The old men said that they had never seen a finer
catch of fish in a single seine net.

The next thing was to cure the fish; a hard job it was
washing it and salting it, for there was no market for fresh
fish at that time. There were eight thousand fish in the
great heap, for it was large-sized fish. We were pretty well
worn out after the day’s fishing, and we had a good night’s
sleep, never fear.

Early in the morning there was a knock at our door.
My mother got a surprise, for she it was who opened the
door. Who should be there but the old woman’s son,
collecting men to fetch the priest to his mother, who had
been very bad since the middle of the night. My mother
gave me a call—I was fast asleep at the moment. I
sprang up. I had no wish to fail to do my share of the duty
of helping to bring the priest to her. I dressed myself, and
my mother got ready a saucepan of warm milk while I was
dressing. I bolted it and a hunk of bread, and out of the
door I went. I managed to be one of the first who got to
the harbour, but they were coming up, man after man, till
we were all collected. It was a fine, soft morning, only
rather dark. Off we went and came to Dunquin. And the

sick woman’s son went to Ballyferriter parish to get the
priest, with another lad in his company.

The day was passing, and there was not a sign of man or
dog with news, but at last, as the day drew to its end, the
priest came, but he had nothing to tell us of the other two,
for they had made their call on him early in the day. We
launched the boat, took the priest aboard, and made our
best speed to sea, home to the Blasket. We weren’t far out
from the land when a heavy mist descended, so that you
couldn’t see to put your finger in your eye, but we kept on
rowing for a good bit, though we caught no glimpse of
land or any house. We were at work so long that we grew
weary, and we realized that we were lost and that it was
useless to keep on working, so we stopped for some time.
Then the priest asked us if we had given up hope. We
answered that we had, for we should have reached land
long ago if we hadn’t gone astray. The priest started on his
breviary, and at that very moment one of the men looked
out and saw a rock or crag, and off we started towards it,
but, alas! we were three miles out of our way.

Well, it began to lift a bit and we managed to make the
landing-place, and it was evening by this time. The priest
_ didn’t stay long, but came back to us immediately, and off
we started again. It was late evening by the time we got
out to the mainland again. One of our men looked, and
what should he see but the two good-for-nothings down
by the shore with blood streaming from them, for they had
been rising and falling with the drink they had taken. I say
nothing of one of them. But what of the man, the old
woman’s son, whose mother was at death’s door? We
returned home, and that day was no holiday for us, any
more than was the day on which we had made the great
catch of fish.

So does a man’s life wear away, and a great deal of it to
little profit. I had spent my week without getting any turf,

as I had proposed at its beginning, though I had caught
plenty of fish.

A day or two after that the grey woman died. And that
meant more work: to go to the town and bring home what
was needed for the wake. It is the custom for those who
fetch the priest to go for the things for the wake. And so you
may be sure I had a hand in all that was going on, for the
son came to my threshold—and, of course, it wasn’t a
refusal I gave him. Off we went in the great seine boat,
eight of us with four oars, two men apiece to three of the
oars, one on the other oar and a man at the rudder. We
got to Dunquin. He arranged for a horse, and they started
off. There were three men in the cart, two from the Island,
and the driver; and a woman with them. It is an ancient
custom for a woman to go with those who get the things
for a wake.

I stayed behind in Dunquin. Although I said nothing,
I fancied the cart wouldn’t be back very quickly. All the
same it was. They had good stuff for the old hag’s wake
with them. You could get a pint of porter there, too, and
a glass of whisky. She was taken ashore on a magnificent
day, only her family burial place was a good way off, in
Ventry churchyard. There was a tavern in that parish,
and it was a regular custom for those who followed the
funeral to have a drinking bout there. Most of us went in
there that day, too. Anybody who didn’t go in made his
way home, and it was pretty late in the day before we got
there. The rest stayed in Ventry parish till the next day,
and came home about noon. That was the last end of the
grey woman opposite, and I can tell you that, if it wasn’t
my luck to be rich the day she left the world, it wasn’t for
want of her good wishes. I hadn’t a thing to say against her.

Well, so that was done with. But the dead don’t feed the
living, and every one of us began to think of what most
needed doing. Since it was the turf-cutting season, we were

all making for the hill, every man starting out as soon as
his preparations were made. My own spade was in the bog
every day, and nothing mattered, I thought, so long as I
could have the turf cut before the dry season set in. The
thought gave me no rest till I had my hand on the haft of
the spade. I was working away splendidly for the most part
of the day, and I had a good bit of work done when all the
young girls of the Island came upon me, going out to drive
the cows home. They set upon me, one of them pulling my
ear, another snatching the spade out of my hands, two
others looking for a chance to tip me over on the flat of my
back in the bog to have some fun out of me. If one didn’t
think of a trick another had it in a second.

I knew perfectly well that I’d cut my last sod of turf
that day when I saw the mop head of the first of them
coming between me and the daylight. For the gang of
girls we had in the Island in those days were next door to
being half wild. And, though I was pretty tired before they
came, sure it was they that finished me altogether. And
no wonder—six girls, just about beginning to ripen, run-
ning over with high spirits, whatever sort of food and
drink they had. It’s easy baking when you have meal to
hand, and so it was with them: stout, strong hoydens, as
healthy as the fish in the sea; it made no odds to them what
sort of food they had on the table, and they didn’t care.

The worst they could do to me didn’t vex or worry me,
be sure of that. It would have been an odd thing, indeed,
if it had, for it was the wild spirit of youth that was driving
them, and sure I had a good right to have a spark of the
same fire touching me up, too, for there was many a young
man of my own kind who’d rather have them playing their
games with him than all the turf on the hills.

One day soon after this—that is to say, the day I meant
to finish with the turf till the next year (if I lived)—what
should come my way but the very same gang of girls. They


used to be driving the cows home and playing all sorts of
mad tricks as they did so. Of course, they spied me out.
They were on me at once, throwing things at me, and up
to every mischief. Since I was putting the last hand to the
turf-cutting, I promised myself that I would spend the rest
of the evening having fun with them. There wasn’t one
of the six, if I had given her the wink, that wouldn’t have
gone with me ready and willing for the knot there’s no
untying; but, whoever I had my eye on in those days, it
wasn’t any one of those six. Never mind—it would do me
no great harm to have a bit of fun with them, and I had it
all right. If I felt any weariness, it left me then, for those
six went for one another again and again, and no sooner
were they up than they’d be down again, one overturning
the other, and the same with me, too. It’s long I remem-
bered that afternoon; I remember it still. Says the poet:
‘Bothering with women never did a man any good! and
that’s just how it was with me, for they sent me astray
from my work from that time out.

Well, as I said about these girls, that it looked as though
I wasn’t going to get on with my job for some time to come
because of them, I was right: for, when I saw them heaped
hugger-mugger on top of one another that afternoon, it
came into my head that the best thing I could do was to
get one of the kind for a wife for myself—and it was high
time, too!
12. The Day of the Seal Hunt

THE TURF-SHELTER: THE DOG iN THE HOLE: THE
SEAL CAVE+> TWO ON A ROPE: THE MAN WHO
COULDN’T SWIM: EIGHT SEALS KILLED: THE

SWELL IN THE CAVE:MY UNCLE NEARLY
DROWNED

I wap the turf cut now, and was fairly satisfied, only there
was a great deal of work to be done on it as soon as it
dried: and the beginning of the dry season was making
itself felt already. My plan was to spend another day in
fixing up a good shelter, so that all I should have to do
would be to throw the turf in when it was dry, for it would
hold me up if I left it till later.

The day I decided on for this was a wild, gusty, dry day,
just right for the job I had in hand, and off I went up the
hill. When I got there, I stripped to the shirt, for the place
where I was going to work was well sheltered.

I set to work right in the very midst of an old stone
structure that had never been shifted for forty or sixty
years before, and began to set it to rights, designing a new
shelter. I had a pup with me, and I noticed nothing till
he had slipped between my legs and ran back under an
overhanging flagstone that projected far out, with a hollow
space beneath it. My pup went so far into the hole under
the stone that I couldn’t see a trace of him.

Well, Pd lost my fine dog—and a fine dog he was, too.
He had a reputable name, for we had gone as far back as
the Fenians of old to fetch it for him. Oscar was what we
called him, The pup had ruined my day’s work for me and
put an end at once to all my energy and determination.
I started to bend down and peer under the hollow of the
stone, and I managed to see about an inch of the tip of his

tail. So I began to call him out, but that wasn’t much good,
and I realized that he was stuck there. I was in a queer fix
then. My new shelter wasn’t made yet; my pup was lost,
and I was terrified of what my father would say, for he it
was who had brought the pup from Dingle, carrying him
for eight miles in a basket on his back. I had a big fishing
hook in my pocket and a good bit of twine, so I tied it to
the handle of the turf-spade and thrust it back into the
hole as far as I could. The hook stuck into the top of the
pup’s behind. I dragged him towards me, and out he came
easily enough, with a lump of a rabbit in his jaws; the
rabbit was dead, and the pup had eaten one of his front
paws, and, when I pulled it out of his mouth, he gave one
leap back into the hole again. When I looked for him again,
I couldn’t see a sign of him, I was beside myself. I failed
to get him out of the hole again, and late in the evening
I had to go home in a very bad humour.

I got home in a pretty bad temper and hung up the
rabbit. My meal was ready, of course, and I went up to
the table.

‘I expect,’ said my mother, ‘that it was the pup that
caught the rabbit for you.’

‘It was,’ said I, ‘and he’s left himself for a forfeit.’

‘How did he do that?’ says she, ‘Did he go over the
cliff?’

I told her the whole story from beginning to end—how
I fetched him out with the hook, and he dived into the
hole again at once. ‘And he’ll stay there for good and all,’
T told her.

‘Don’t mind if he does,’ says she.

My father never breathed a word while this talk was
going on, and I thought that he was saving it up for me,
and that I should hear what he had to say soon enough:
for I fancied that he would think that it was by my own
carelessness I had lost the pup.


But often things turn out differently from what we expect.
And so it was with me and my father, for when he did
speak, there was good sense in what he had to say.

‘I believe,’ said he, ‘that Oscar would never have gone
back into the hole if he hadn’t scented another rabbit there
—possibly two, or even three of them.’

There’s nothing children like to hear more than a
friendly word from a good father and mother, and that was
my case then, for, though I’d been upset enough when I
came down from the hill, the worst thing for me had been
what I expected to hear from them. As it was, they dis-
persed all my fear; and things remained like that until the
morrow.

If ever I slept late, it wasn’t that next morning, as my
head was full of thoughts of the pup. So I was up at break
of day. I took a bite or two and drank a cup or so of milk.
My mother heard me, and asked where I was off to so
early: ‘Surely you have the whole long day before you,
and,’ says she, ‘do you see your father around?’

‘No,’ said I.

‘He left his bed a while back, and I fancy he went up
the hill.’

I had no difficulty in believing this, and, when I was
ready, off I went after him. And once I'd started I never
stopped until I had reached the spot where I had been at
work. The first thing I saw coming towards me was
Oscar. He ran up to me pretty soon, and you’d have
thought that he hadn’t seen me for half a year when he
caught sight of me. My father was standing on the flag-
stone. He’d just got Oscar out, with five huge rabbits,
pulled out of the hole along with the pup. My father was
cleverer than I was, for he’d made a channel at the end of
the stone, in the place where he guessed the end of the
hole would be, and when he thrust his hand in, he found
a rabbit, and then two, till he had five of the finest rabbits

that were ever taken out of a single hole. He flung them
across his shoulder and went off home. I finished my new
turf shelter.

Thad planned to have a rest when I had the turf cut and
the shelter ready for throwing it in when it was dry; but
I didn’t get it, my lad! My father had always been a first-
rate man in his youth and afterwards, and it was a constant
saying of his that nobody ever got anything properly done
who lay abed on the flat of his back when the sun was
shining in the sky, and that it was bad for the health, too.

Well, whatever he was in the habit of saying, I had
arranged with myself to have an extra bit of bed this
morning before starting on another job. But before long
T heard somebody talking loud. A man spoke by the hearth
and asked was Tom awake yet. My mother said no.

“Why do you ask?’ says she.

‘There’s a boat going after seals,’ says he,

The speaker was an uncle of mine on my mother’s side.
At first I thought it was my father speaking, but no—he
had gone back to the strand.

T leapt up and, when I’d had a bite, crammed some food
into my pocket and set out for the boat. All the rest were
ready before me, with everything necessary to get the best
of the seals: ropes to drag them out of the cave when they
should be dead, and a big, stout club with a thick end to it
—we should want that right enough to lay them low. Off
we went out of the creek.

Another boat had left early in the morning, but they had
taken the direction of the Lesser Blaskets, They had fetched
up at Inishvickillaun—a famous place for seals in the
caves—for there are a lot of caves in that island.

You need calm weather and a good spring tide. Well,
we put out the four oars, ‘tough, sweet-sounding, enduring,
white, broad bladed’, as was the way with the boats of the
Fenians of old so often, and stayed not from our headlong


course till we reached the mouth of the cave we had
fixed on.

The cave was in the western end of the Great Island. It
was a very dangerous place, for there was always a strong
swell round it, and it’s a long swim into it, and you have to
swim sidelong, for the cleft in the rock has only just room
for a seal. When the boat stopped in the mouth of the cave
there was a strong suck of swell running. Often and again
the mouth of the hole would fill up completely, so that you’d
despair of ever seeing again anybody who happened to be
inside, and that left those of us who were in the boat little
to say. The only young men there were myself and another
lad, for the likes of us were not experienced enough for the
job. It needs grown men, well on in years.

The captain of the boat spoke and said: ‘Well, what did
we come here for? Isn’t anybody ready to have a go at
the hole?’

It was my uncle who gave him his answer: ‘I’ll go in,’
said he, ‘if another man will come with me.’

Another man in the boat answered him: ‘I’ll go in with
you,’ says he.

He was a man who stood in need of a bit of seal meat,
for he spent most of his life on short commons. He had a
big family, and none of them old enough to give him any
help.

The two made their preparations. There was a bridge of
rock across the mouth of the cave, with the water above
and beneath it. Two men had to stand on the bridge to help
the other two in. One of the two was a good swimmer,
but not my uncle. The swimmer went in first, carrying the
end of the rope in his mouth, the slaughtering stick under
his oxter, a candle and matches in his cap and the cap on
his head. It was useless to go into the cave without a light,
for it penetrated too far under the ground. My uncle
followed him, another rope tied round him, and his hand

gripping the swimmer’s rope, one end of which was tied
up somewhere inside, while its other was fastened to the
bridge outside so as to be always ready.

The other youngster and I stayed on the bridge to drag
out the seals from the two inside. They kindled a light, and
when they reached the end of the cave, there was a beach
full of seals there—big and little, male and female. Baznir-
seach is the name of the female seal, and the male is called
the bull. There are some of them that it’s absolutely
impossible to kill.

The two inside made themselves ready for the great
enterprise before them. Each of them had a club, and they
aimed a blow at every one of the seals. They had a lighted
candle on a boulder. Both of them had a flannel shirt on,
dripping, of course, from the salt water it had come
through. When they had finished the slaughter and all the
seals there were killed, they had more trouble in front of
them. Many of the seals were very heavy, and the cave was
a most awkward place: there were great boulders between
them and the water, and the passage out was a very long
one. But there’s no limit to the strength a man has when
he’s in a tight place, and those two, handling the dead
bodies of the seals there on the beach underground, worked
like horses. They dragged every one of eight seals down
to the water, and by the time they had done, the swell burst
into the cave, and the two of us who were on the bridge
had to grip the rock wall high up.

When that stress was past, there came a calm, and one of
the men inside shouted to us to drag the rope out. We
thought that one of themselves was on the rope, but it
wasn’t so. Four huge seals were tied to it. We had to pass
the end of the rope to the boat, and, when the seals had
been lifted in, to send it into the cave again. This rope was
fastened to the rope that remained stretched into the cave,
and the man who was with me on the bridge shouted out


loud to them to draw it in again, and they did so in double
quick time. Before long those inside called to us to drag
it hack again. The swell was raging mad by this. When
we drew in the rope, there were four other seals tied to it,
though we expected that it would be one of the men
themselves. We had to do as we had done before and send
the rope in again. Every now and then we were forced to
leave the bridge from the great seas that swept over it,
filling up the mouth of the cave too.

It was the swimmer who took to the rope first to make
his way out, leaving it to the other man to use the fixed
rope. It took the swimmer in the passage a long time to
reach the bridge, there was so heavy a swell. He got there
in the end, with his flannel shirt torn to tatters. My uncle—
who, as I said before, couldn’t swim a stroke—started on
the last rope. The rise and fall and suck of the swell made
it hard for us to pull him to the bridge. In the middle of it all,
the rope broke, and the wave swept him back with it into
the cave again. My heart was in my mouth when I saw
him going down. I thought he was lost. I plunged down
from the bridge into the submerged cave. My foot struck
the end of the broken rope under water. By God’s grace
I brought off my good uncle safe and sound, but we had
a desperate struggle for it. I was a good swimmer in
those days.

Our big boat was loaded down to the gunwale with
four cow seals, two bulis, and two two-year-olds—one for
each of the crew. Every one of the men had a barrelful of
seal meat, and we reckoned in those days that every barrel
of seal meat was worth a barrel of pork. The skins fetched
eight pounds,

It’s odd the way the world changes. Nobody would put
a bit of seal meat in his mouth to-day. They melt it down
for light, for it is cram-full of oil. Moreover, if you made
a present of the skin to a gentleman, he’d hardly deign to

accept it from you. It’s long since anybody tried to do
anything with one of them but throw it to the dogs. Yet in
those days they were a great resource for the people, both
the skin and the meat, and you could get a pack of meal
for one of them. And anywhere you liked to take a lump
of seal’s flesh you could get the same weight of pork for it,
if there were any in the house. People don’t know what
is best for them to eat, for the men that ate that kind of
food were twice as good as the men of to-day. The poor
people of the countryside were accustomed to say that
they fancied they would live as long as the eagle if they
but had the food of the Dingle people. But the fact is that
the eaters of good meat are in the grave this long time,
while those who lived on starvation diet are still alive and
kicking.
13. A Wife proposed for Me

THE FAMILY IN THE INISH+ THE DAY WITH THE
PIGS IN DINGLE- ‘IT’S A DAY OF OUR LIFE’-
SONGS AND REVELRY: THE BIG MAN + COMING
HOME : GOING TO INISHVICKILLAUN HUNTING

RABBITS

The year 1878 (or about that) was a fine year for potatoes
and fish and turf, and it was no hard task for poor folk to
pass the time on a bit when things went well with them
like that. Usually in a year of this kind there was much
talk of marriages. Round Christmas time this year there
was a fat sheep hanging up in every house in the Island and
rabbits were plentiful, and meat from the town.

I fancy there was no village in the countryside in which
meat was so common as it was in the Island at that time.
There'd be a bottle of whisky or so, too, either given or
bought. I remember the time when there was only one
pot-oven in the Island, and it never left the fire for the
seven days of the week.

In those days one of the Dalys lived in Inishvickillaun
as a herd, and he had a great time of it in the island—that
is, when his children were grown up. There was a great
demand for the kind of fish known as lobsters, and the
herd’s children were grown men at the time and had a
boat of their own. In those days I myself spent night after
night there, for we used to be fishing in the far island all
the time, and if we hadn’t any fish to take home, we used
to run the boat ashore; for that was what the old couple in
the house had told us to do.

The people used to say that they were the best couple
that had ever stood on the rock. They had five sons and
five daughters, the finest family of children, take them for

all in all, that any couple had had for many a long day.
I was the only young man in the boat, and, that being so,
the young folk and I had a deal to say to one another, and,
before long, one of the daughters and I were making up to
one another. She was a very fine girl, and the best singer
going in her day. We’d made many a call there that
season, and had a very good time. The year remained fine
for us up to Christmas.

The man on the rock had two splendid pigs, and, as they
had always been so good to us, we promised them that we
would go to fetch the pigs next week. One fine day in that
week my uncle ran in one morning—the uncle for whom
I had run into such danger in the seal cave the day the
rope broke.

‘What’s your hurry to-day?’ said I.

‘Hurry enough, my lad! We shall have a fine day to-day,
and we'll go to get the pigs, and maybe if anybody’s slow
to go there, it won’t be you!’

‘Yerra, why so?’ says my mother.

“Ye, God help you, if that’s the way with you!’ says he.
‘Aren’t all the young women on the rock running wild
after him—and they’re a handsome lot there! You ought
to be wanting the help of one of them hard enough by
rights.’

‘Be up in two leaps,’ said he to me then.

We went to the rock. When we were starting out from
the house with the pigs to the harbour, the old woman of
the house handed her husband a bottle of whisky to serve
round to us. No woman in her day had a better name for
kindness than she had, though I should be sorry to say a
word more in praise of her than of her husband, so far as
my acquaintance with them went.

We never gave the pigs rest till we’d placed them in the
boat—two fine pigs, a year old. The woman herself and
one of her daughters—the girl my uncle Diarmid was


always matching with me—went with us. Out we put to
sea. Up went the sails. We had a fair wind with us all the
way to the creek in the Great Blasket. We landed them
there that day so that they might go out with the Island
pigs on the morrow.

Next day, when we had eaten, everybody who had a
pig or two pigs was making ready to start for the land. I
had a fine pig of my own, and my uncle Diarmid had one
nearly as good. They were both of them put into the boat,
with another belonging to one of the villagers, the two
pigs from the Inish, the woman from the Inish, and her
daughter. It was a big boat, and the number I have
reckoned up filled it pretty well. They were set on shore in
Dunquin, and the boat went home again. There were a
boat or two, besides, out with pigs, and they went home,
too. Off we started along the road, walking, with our pigs.
About half-way Diarmid’s pig struck; the road was hurting
her; she was a very heavy animal, with poor feet. But
Diarmid had a friend by him this time.

‘Stay by the pig,’ says he to me, ‘and my soul from the
devil but I'll fetch something quickly that’ll lift her off the
soil of Ireland.’

I had to do what he asked me, though my own pig
could have walked to Tralee. The women from the Inish
and I and the pigs waited together until Diarmid came
back with a good horse and a creel on the cart. The driver
was an uncle of Diarmid’s, and of my mother, too.

We threw Diarmid’s pig in, and that was the stiffest job
of work I’d ever known in my life up to then—the driver
and my uncle joined hands under the forepart of her,
while I had to lift her rear, and the weight would have
been altogether too much for me if the Inish woman
hadn’t lent me a hand. We looked over the other pigs then
to see which of them showed most signs of being tired, and
we lifted mine and one of the Inish pigs into the cart.

There wasn’t room for the fourth one, and we started off.
When we found that it held us up too much to wait for the
walking pig, the driver and my uncle went off with the
others, and were to come back again to pick up the fourth.
We continued to walk along, and we had got as far as the
corner of the pier in Dingle before they came to us. It
wasn’t worth while to lift him into the cart then, so we
drove him along on his feet. At the corner of the quay
Diarmid gave him a slash with a switch he had in his
hand. That hurt him, so he swerved, and off he went,
helter-skelter, down the quay. The driver got in front of
him, but he ran between his legs and carried him off and
flung him on the flat of his back out in the sea, and went
with him himself.

Diarmid got a hold of the driver, who was only just in
the water, and pulled him up, very sorry for himself. The
pig faced out to sea.

‘Holy Mary! the poor woman’s pig is drowned,’ says
Diarmid to me. ‘And isn’t it a shame, and she such a
decent woman!’

I could see that he was getting at me to save the pig,
though he didn’t like to tell me straight out to go swim-
ming after it. There wasn’t a boat or an oar in the harbour
that wasn’t in use, and I should have been sorry to see the
pig go down. I snatched the switch from my uncle’s hand
and ran down the quay. I threw off my clothes and plunged
in from the end of the quay. Diarmid spoke from above:

‘Whatever you do, don’t get tangled up with the pig or
he’ll drown you,’ says he.

He needn’t have told me that; but he was terribly afraid
for me.

I came up with him pretty quickly and turned him in
to land. I had to take the switch out of my mouth and
make use of it before I could face him for the land. When
he reached the slip, the driver got him by the ear: it was


easy enough to hold him now, however it had been when
he floored him in his flight. I swam back to my clothes.
The pigs were driven into a house. The driver had a drink
or two, and then went off home.

‘Come along, uncle,’ said I, ‘and we'll have a bite of
food.’

We went into a house where there was food to be had,
and both made a thoroughly good meal. Then we went
to look up our friend to whose house every Islander who
came to Dingle always made his way. He began bargaining
for our pigs. He had already looked them over. Diarmid
and he managed to come to terms quickly, and then they
came to me. He gave five pounds ten for Diarmid’s pig,
and before long he had my pig, too, for six pounds. We’d
only just finished our business when the two women from
the Inish came in through the door. I turned to the host
and told him to give them any drink they fancied, but the
old woman said at once that they ought rather to stand
me one, for they’d have lost their pig if it hadn’t been
for me.

‘For Mary’s sake,’ said Diarmid, ‘let him be. It won’t do
him much damage to stand us a drink when he’s just got
six pounds clear for his pig.’

“Who bought them?’

‘The man of this house bought both his and mine,’ says
Diarmid.

What I did was to give Diarmid half a pint.

‘Look here,’ says I, ‘take that into that room. I’ll come
to you later.’

‘But where are you going?’ says Diarmid.

‘O, a small job; I won’t be two minutes.’

‘O, by Mary! we’ll have no fun at all if that’s the way.’

I had a good reason for going. I wanted some braces,
for my breeches only depended on a bit of string from back
to front. My old braces were all in tatters with the work

I'd had with the pigs since the first day we went to the
Inish until now.

I left them there and went off to a clothes shop.

‘Yerra, welcome from the West,’ says the woman in the
shop.

“May you live to be a hundred, good woman,’ was my
answer to that. It wasn’t for her deserts that I called her
‘good woman’—for I had reason often enough to know
that there wasn’t much to be said in her praise—but by
way of good manners.

She was asking me questions about this and that, and
glancing at me now and again all the time to see when I’d
begin to ask for what had brought me. Every now and
then I’d put a hand in my pocket, and her eyes danced in
her head, one on the shop and the other on me.

“Show me a pair of braces,’ I said at last. I’d have left
her to suffer a while longer without showing her my money
if it hadn’t been that I was losing all the fun of Diarmid
and his half-pint, for I knew he’d give me sport—that’s
why Id left it in his hand when I came away. The shop-
woman got out a pair of braces at once.

“These are a shilling a pair,’ says she. “They’re imported
braces,’

I took a pair of them in my hand, and saw at once they

_ were no good.

“Give me the very best, if you have them,’ said I. ‘If those
are imported goods, keep them till customers are imported
to buy them from you.’

I scored calmly off the shopwoman, and another
woman who was there burst out laughing. The shop-
woman flushed up. Then she brought out the old kind.
I chose a pair of them, handed her a shilling, and out
I came.

When I came back to Sunshine Diarmid—and well he
earned the name by this time—every soul in Goat Street


was collected round him. Some of them were sitting on
stools, some standing up. The house was full, for ali the
Islanders who had come with pigs had turned up by now,
and the drink was circulating fast. The old woman from
the Inish was singing ‘For Ireland I won’t tell her name’,
and you'd leave food untouched to listen to her. And her
daughter was better than she was.

A man spoke to me and said: ‘The fairy music is
a-singing.’

We went on like that far into the night—the women
singing and the men drinking, all of them talking louder
and louder and their wits. gone wandering.

All of them took lodgings in the town that night. On
the morrow morn there were plenty of pigs and people
about. That was a day of drink and good company in
Dingle. Each lot of us picked out his own bar. Every
family had relations there, and preferred to spend their
money in their kinsman’s house. We went to the house of
the man who bought our pigs from us and sat there. The
twa from the Inish were with us. Others from the country-
side gathered round us—some of them relations of ours
and others who had no connexion with us.

A lot of them spied out Diarmid the Joker. They knew
well enough that they would have fun with him, and sure
enough they had. Round went the drink. The old woman
from the Inish stood the first drink, half a gallon of porter,
for the boat’s crew that had brought in the pigs were there.

Jolly Diarmid shook her hand, and came over to me and
shook my hand, too.

‘Tune up a song to raise my heart after the week’s work,’
says he.

I knew better than to refuse him, for he’d make a
laughing-stock of me. “The Dark Woman’s Smooth Hill’,
that was my song, and few spoke till I had finished it. If
there were two better than me, there were three worse.

The old woman sang the second song, and she was splendid
at it. ‘The Soft Deal Plank’ was the song the girl, her
daughter, sang, and she sang it faultlessly. The drink was
being drunk and drawn like anything till everyone had his
fair share taken. The house and the pavement outside it
were crowded.

Before long I saw a big fellow pushing his way through
the people, and he spoke: ‘By your leave, men,’ says he,
and he never stopped till he got to me, and he wrung my
hand seven times over. ‘Devil carry me! I’d have cleared
off home before long and never heard you singing a song!’
says he, banging on the table. “Half a pint of whisky
here!’ says he. ‘Yerra, wisha! out with your voice, if you
please,’ says he.

We knew one another well, for often before that I’d had
to sing him a song. He was a great drinker, but he was
decent in his drink. The half-pint came at once, and I
couldn’t refuse. I had to toss off a glass. Then the music
started, Well I remember the song I sang that day. ‘For
Treland I won’t tell her name’, that was it, for I knew well
that was the one the big man liked best, for often before
had I sung it for him. When it was finished, the big man
sent round drinks again.

‘I wonder,’ says he to me, ‘if there’s anybody else here to
sing a song?’

‘There is, my boy,’ said I, pointing out the two women
from the Inish.

They didn’t refuse him, and what did they do but start
together, the two of them, to sing the song, for they were
mother and daughter. It was no great marvel, for one of
them was born of the other. I’m sure that most of that
company felt as I felt, that I would cheerfully have spent
two days and two nights without food or drink listening
to the singing of those two.

When the song was ended, the big man shook hands


with them both heartily, and he did the same to me, as it
was I who had guided him to that fairy music: and he beat
upon the table again and called for another half-pint.
A shilling was the price of a half-pint in those days. It
costs nine shillings this very day of writing. He put the
bottle in my hand to share it out. One would take it from
me for two who didn’t. I saw Sunshine Diarmid in the
corer piping noisily away, for he had drunk his fair share,
and I said to myself that I should have to spend another
night in the town.

Before long the big man turned to me again and shook
me by the hand.

‘I should like to hear another of your songs before we
start for home,’ says he. ‘It’ll be a good while, maybe,
before we run across one another again.’

I gave in to him, of course. I sang a song or two, and the
women from the Inish sang three of them, and another on
the top of that, and, when it seemed to me that it was
getting on for the time for going home, the company
didn’t agree with me. At last, late in the day, at the time
of the wool market—that’s always the latest of all the
markets—the time to be making our best speed on the
homeward road, Diarmid was getting wilder and wilder,
and never thinking of his little home, nor would he have
given it a thought before Christmas so long as the drink
was going its rounds,

I spoke crossly to him, and said that surely it was high
time for us to be getting along home, now we had two days
and two nights away. But he only rushed up to me and
started mauling me with kisses.

I spoke to the woman from the Inish and gave her the
same hint.

‘Yerra, wisha,’ says she, ‘this is a day of our life, and we
shan’t always be in the way of a day like it.’

I should know how to deal with answers of that kind

to-day, perhaps, when I am old, but in those days I was
young and light-headed. I had to bring my uncle back
home—and he’d left a houseful of children behind him,
some of them with pretty empty bellies until the money for
the pigs should bring them something. As for the woman
from the Inish, she had only left two stones of yellow meal
in that island of the sea, and yet neither she nor Diarmid
let the thought of house or home worry them the least bit.
When I had thought of all this, I gave up altogether and
said to myself that I was done with giving them advice, but
would agree with whatever they said; and so it was.

A lot of them had cleared out of the public-house by this,
but the big man was still there. The woman from the
Inish was talking to him, and in the course of the con-
versation she said she’d have to hire a horse from the town
to Dunquin next day.

‘If I'd been keeping my eye on the carts from the
countryside since morning, my things would have been
there to-night,’ says she.

‘Have you got a load?’ said he to me.

‘I shall have about half a sack of meal,’ said I.

‘Diarmid will have something, too,’ says he.

‘Certainly he will,’ said I. Diarmid hadn’t a ray of sense
left by this time.

‘I pledge my solemn word that I shall be here by eight
o’clock to-morrow morning, if I live,’ says he.

He put to his horse and drove off down the main street,
and I daresay he wasn’t long getting home.

I turned in again to the rake, Diarmid. He could hardly
stand,

The woman from the Inish came in after me.

‘Come along,’ said I to him, ‘we'll be getting home, or
haven't you any feeling for the lump of a wife you’ve left
behind you?’

‘Well, she’s no beauty,’ says he. ‘She’ll be all right.’


We dragged him out with us, and made our way to a
house where we would get some food. They put good food
before us, but we ate very little of it. I went off to bed, and
fell asleep very soon. It was far on in the night when my
uncle came. He fell asleep at once, and slept like the dead.
I had another nap, and when I came to myself again
morning was breaking and day was coming. I stayed
awake, for I said to myself that the man with the cart would
be along soon—that is, if he was a man of his word, I never
dreamed that he would be there as early as he proposed,
but I hoped that he’d come along some time that day, for
he was a sensible sort of fellow.

I hadn’t been turning over these thoughts for long when
IT heard the rattle of a cart, but it never passed through my
head that ic was the big man so early as that. Yet I was
wrong, for it was he all right. He put up his horse in his
usual place and came to us. We waited till breakfast was
ready, and then started to collect our things into the cart,
for we'd packed them up the day before. Diarmid the mad
was not yet himself, nor near it. However, off we went
helter-skelter out of the town, after spending three days
and nights there.

We faced for Dunquin and got there fast enough. A boat
had come out to fetch the woman of the Inish. The man
with the cart bade us farewell and turned towards Bally-
ferriter, his own place.

We went down to the boat at once and set sail for the
Great Blasket. We didn’t shift the provisions for the Inish
out of the boat, for Diarmid had planned to go back with
them, take some hunting tackle with us, and bring a fine
load of rabbits with us on our return.

I couldn’t escape, though I wasn’t very keen to go there
after Dingle; but Diarmid was my mother’s brother, and,
besides that, there was the girl. She and I were always
making up to one another. So we hoisted the sails again,
TRANSPORTING A COW TO THE MAINLAND

and off we went at full speed till we reached Inishvickil-
laun. We spent two days and nights in that rock, bringing
lots of rabbits back with us every evening, singing song after
song every night till one o’clock, and sleeping till high
noon, My uncle never stopped trying to make a match
between me and the girl, every night and all the time, and
no doubt there was a touch of cunning at the back of this,
for she took good care that the two of us had our share of
any good things that were going all that time, whether
her people knew it or not.

On the morning of the third day it wasn’t too fine and
we made our preparations for starting home. We were all
loaded down as we went to the boat, and every soul in the
island followed us to the water. They were thoroughly
down in the mouth because we were going. I may as well
admit that, whatever was the case with the others, I
wasn’t too cheerful, and no wonder, for I was leaving
behind me the merriest days I had ever known, and, into
the bargain, I was turning my back on the girl I liked best
in the whole blessed world right then.

Well, we shifted off home, and the people there were
pretty jealous of us. We had a cargo of fat rabbits, and all
those who had stayed behind had was seaweed and turf
and manure.
14. Christmas Provisions

DEATH OF BALD TOM: GOING TO DINGLE TO
FETCH PROVISIONS FOR CHRISTMAS > THE
FISHWIVES - TOM’S SHEEP~ A BOAT’S CREW
ASTRAY + A WINDY NIGHT: ‘HARD LUCK ON THE
DROWNED’ -‘A HAIR OF THE DOG THAT BIT YOU’

WHEN we got home, Bald Tom was at his last gasp, in need
ofa priest. At the end of the night there was a knock on our
door, and my mother called me and said that Paddy was
waiting for me to go with him to fetch the priest for his
father, who was breathing his last.

I couldn’t fail him now, since I’d fetched the priest for
his mother. Besides, I realized that there are some people
that no ill wind goes by without putting them to some
trouble or other. There were some of closer kin to Tom than
I who were left to have their sleep out that day.

I had a bit to eat and off I went out of the door. Paddy
wasn’t long in bringing the priest to Dunquin, and the
whole trip was over very soon. Tom was dead the next day.
Then there was another journey for the wake and another
for the burying. That’s how I spent my month from the
first day we fetched the pigs from the Inish till the day we
laid Bald Tom in the churchyard in Ventry.

Paddy was planning to move to another little house
higher up; and so he did. It was a wreck of a place just
opposite the house we had then. He was married by this,

It was now the beginning of the Christmas month. All
fishing was at an end, and the Islanders set about manur-
ing their ground. Late and early we were at it, raking
away; and that was our practice in the Island every year
up to St. Bridget’s Day.

In those days our custom was to go early to town on
Christmas business, I had carried a good heap of seaweed

to the crest of the cliff above the strand, and was all set to
start carrying it with the good ass I had, for it was a dry,
windy day. I looked and saw a young lad coming towards
me. I saw at once that he had some business with me.

‘What brought you here, my boy?’ said I.

‘Your mother sent me to you to see if you would go to
Dingle,’ said he, ‘for the whole village is going there.’

I thanked him and told him I’d go.

He went back home hot-foot.

‘Tell my mother to have my clothes ready for me, and
Pll bring you some sweets,’ said I.

I started off after him without much enthusiasm, for all
the hindrances were putting me wrong, and I hadn’t
carried my manure to the field, but since the whole Island
was going to get ready for Christmas, I said to myself that
I'd find it easier to go in their company, for I should have
to go alone if I left it till later.

When I got to the house I was as pleased as anything,
for I saw the old man had the ass ready.

‘Where’s the seaweed back there?’ said he.

“The big heap,’ I answered.

When I was ready I ran out, and all the men in the
Island were on the cliff above the creek, all of them in their
new clothes, one man with a sheep or two, another with a
basket of fish, a third carrying a sack of wool, and all of
them making for the boats to sail them up Dingle Bay and
moor them at the quay.

My three uncles and my sister Kate’s husband, Pats
Heamish, were going down to the boat for Dingle. Though
they were all good friends of mine, I wasn’t too anxious
to go in their company. I’d had enough of Pats Heamish
the day I was with him, and of my uncle Diarmid, too,
you may be sure, that day with the pigs, and that wasn’t
so long ago either.

When I came to a halt on the cliff-top, Diarmid came


from below after taking a basket of fish down to the
water.

‘Are you going to Dingle?’ says he to me.

‘I was thinking of it,’ says I.

‘Why on earth, then, couldn’t you get ready?’ said he.
‘Have you got any fish or anything else to take with
you.’

‘I had half a hundred pollock to take, but I haven’t the
time now to put them together,’ says I. ‘Aren’t you all
ready now?’

“Run off with you now and put them up,’ said he. ‘The
boat will wait for you.’

As I’ve said before, Diarmid was the best of the whole
lot. The rest hadn’t a thing to say to me, though all who
were going in the boat were kinsmen of mine.

I sprang off at once. I put up my fish with two ropes I
had. Another lad brought one of the bundles down to me,
and I had the whole thing done in half an hour. The boat
was afloat, ready and waiting for me. ‘Holy Mary!’ says
Diarmid, ‘you didn’t take long.’ They took the bundles
aboard and off we sailed for Dingle.

In those days there were always women called ‘huck-
sters’ on the quay. Their business was to buy and sell fish,
and they made their living out of it. When we had cleared
everything out of the boat and carried it up, these women
rushed at me, and before long they had bought my fish
from me for fifty shillings the half-hundred.

‘In Mary’s name!’ says Diarmid. ‘You’ve got the price
of a drink off the women pretty quick.’

‘He has, my lad,’ said a spirited woman of their com-
pany, ‘and you'll get a drink too. Come on.’

As he had a great taste for it, he went along with me, and
we entered the same house. The women paid me every
penny, and when I had the money, I asked them what
they'd have.

‘Oh, you'll have a drink off us first,’ said the woman
again.

She called for a drink and paid for it on the nail. The
second drink was on me, of course, as I was making money,
and the third on Diarmid, for the women had bought his
fish, too.

Diarmid and I had drunk three drinks by this, and as
he always had a slate loose, you’d have sworn he’d been
drinking for months. Off we went down to the slip where
the boat was: we hadn’t made it fast yet. We’d hardly got
there when my uncle Tom called to me to go with him for
a bit. He hadn’t sold his two sheep yet.

‘I'll come,’ said I.

‘Holy Mary!—you may as well secure the boat,’ says
Diarmid. ‘It’s late in the day and you’ll be all over the town
before morning, and maybe the tide will carry her away.’

‘Your soul to the Big Fellow!’ says Tom, ‘you took good
care not to worry about the boat before you’d done your
business; and hold her tight now or let her go for good,
you scamp!

I’ve said already in this book that a gust of the ill wind
had always been blowing against me ever since the day the
poet and his songs kept me from cutting the turf, and just
after that when the girls fell on me.

When one of my uncles called the other a scamp, anyone
could see that that day would be no holiday for me to
range at will, the more so as one of them who had little
enough sense at the best of times had a drop taken. I was
right, for in a minute Tom had got a coward’s blow in the
ear-hole.

That blow sent bold Tom off his feet and sent him fly-
ing over the sheep on the flat of his back, but, when he
got his footing again, he went for Diarmid, and, if the
fishwives hadn’t been about, he’d have sent Diarmid into
the other world and me after him, for, make no doubt,


I’d have died to save Diarmid, as I died—or all but—in
the seals’ cave.

When the battle was over, the first thing I did was to call
the women in with me and give them another drop.
Diarmid had escaped into another house farther on in the
town by this, and I was glad enough to see him go. The
women were dragging at my clothes, pressing another
drink on me, but I didn’t want to take two drinks in the one
day off them. And I had another reason—I knew by the
way they were going that my relations wouldn’t have much
sense to spare soon, and that it was just as well we shouldn’t
all of us go out of our wits, particularly in this holy season,
in honour of which we had come upon that trip.

When I left the public-house with these ideas in my
head, at the first glance I threw down the street in which
I was, what should I see but my uncle Tom at grips with
two skinny butchers who were trying to force his sheep
from him for anything they liked to give him. I hurried
up to them, and when I joined my uncle, he had gone all
colours under Heaven. This affair hurt me sorely, and the
two rascals didn’t recognize me. They thought I was only
a lad from the country. Tom had the sheep tied up with
a new rope, and it had cut one of his hands as he struggled
to hold back the sheep from going with that pair.

It was the worst bit of luck for the butchers when I came
on the scene, for they thought that I was some young
country rascal poking his nose in, and that I was on their
side.

‘Shift the rope out of your hand and give it to me,’ said
I to Tom. He did so at once.

‘Stand up for me and the sheep now, and, if you’ve got
as much spirit as you have strength, you surely won’t make
much account of these two damned scarecrows.’

I was angrier then, I think, than I had been since I came
into the world, or have ever been since.

Tom set to work with his foot first, and the young
butcher sprang to one side. The kick landed on one of the
sheep and laid her out stone dead. We were in a fine hulla-
balloo then. The butchers ran off. I had a knife in my
pocket, and I rushed to the sheep and let out her blood.
Now, if ever, my uncle wasn’t pleased with himself: he
had one sheep unsold and another was dead, and, another
thing, a shilling meant more to him than a pound to my
other two uncles. His heart was wrung; but the father of
the young butchers found out what they had done, and he
gave the same price for the dead sheep as for the living.

T left the sheep-dealer there and went off east along the
street. I met with a man or two of my companions going
about their business, getting through it with all speed, for
they were in a hurry to be going home again, the day
being fine.

I hadn’t seen Liam yet or Pats Heamish, my sister
Kate’s husband. I found Liam in a public-house—Muirisin
Ban’s place. He was a real Irish friend to us. Liam had sold
two sacks of wool, and had drunk enough and to spare.

‘In with you and take a drop of this stuff,’ says he to me.
It was porter that he was gulping down as a cow drinks
water.

‘Serve him with a glass of whisky,’ says he. ‘I fancy he’s
no taste for this black stuff.’

The man behind the bar did so. There were five other
men round Liam at this time, all talking together and
drinking. I heard more talk outside, and I went over to
the door to see what was there. What should I see but a
couple of peelers taking a man to the jail; and when I
looked closely at him, I saw that it was Pats Heamish.
I turned round and told the man in the shop what I had
seen.

“We can’t get him out anyhow until ten to-night,’
said he.


In all truth, I was nearly beside myself to hear that.

Our boat’s crew were all in a hopeless mess by this, and
the other boat’s company ready to go home with a lovely
evening for it.

I thank God to-day, as I did then, that I didn’t do what
I had in mind to do, and that is: sit down and drink my
fill. I felt that if I did so the world would surely go as
easily with me as with the others who were taking that
line. I had good cause to be angry: the boat that had come
out with us gone home, and the crew of my boat was melt-
ing like the foam on the river: three of the brothers
sodden with drink, one of them in jail, and, as for the two
others in the boat, I hadn’t seen them all day up to now—
the man we called ‘Kerry’ and the young lad of his
kindred.

I went down to the quay, and at that very moment the
other boat had just put to sea from the slip. They said
farewell to me, and I sent my blessing with them. It was
a lovely evening at this time, though the sky didn’t look
- too promising.

When I turned back from the quay, whom should I see
coming towards me from the town but Kerry, with a load
of carded wool on his back.

“Where have you brought that wool from?’ said I.

‘From the carding mill,’ said he.

I told him that the other boat had gone home.

“It has, has it?’ said he. ‘And sure, if it has, it won’t get
there. I suppose you’ve got all your stuff put together?’

‘I haven’t; and I haven’t bought sixpennyworth.’

‘Well, there’s plenty of time yet. It’s long enough till
ten o'clock.’

‘It looks as though you had no more shame than the
rest of them,’ I said to him. ‘The other boat has gone home,
and here we are still, and maybe it’ll be a week from to-day
before we can leave Dingle.’


‘We shall be at home as soon as they are,’ said he. “Go
in here and we'll have a drink, and we'll start packing up
then and have everything ship-shape for starting back
after the first Mass to-morrow.’

When I heard that speech, my mind changed, and with
good reason—to hear such good sense from this man whom
all the rest of the crew considered a useless ne’er-do-well,
while they themselves were all crazy by this. We went in.
We bought some goods, three of us, and, when we’d done,
the shopkeeper stood us a drink. We went up the town
then, and whom should we meet coming towards us but the
prisoner, Pats Heamish.

‘God and Mary to you,’ says he.

Kerry returned the greeting. Pats’s speech was still
wandering. Muirisin Ban had got him out. I hadn’t seen
the three rakes yet. I left the three others there, and never
stopped till I reached the house of our friend Muirisin Ban,
where they generally spent their time. The three were
there, and every syllable they let out of them would have
split a head of brass. They were so dizzy with the drink
that they hardly knew me till I spoke.

‘Isn’t that you?’ says cracked Diarmid.

‘l’m here,’ said I to him. ‘Are you in any better way
now than when I left you a bit ago?’

‘I am, my boy,’ said he; ‘isn’t it a good way to be in to
have a full belly? Have you seen Kerry and the other lad
since morning?”

‘I have, and he’s not like you,’ said I.

‘Ah! devil take him; the lout never was like me.’

‘Is the crew of the other boat ready yet?’ says Tom.

‘They’re nearly half-way home by now,’ I answered.

When Diarmid heard this, he put his head out at the
door, looked up at the sky and the stars for a bit, and then
came in again.

‘In the name of the Virgin, young lad,’ says he, ‘that’s


a boat that'll never come to harbour, to judge by the wild
look of the sky up there.’

When I heard this from two men whom I knew to be
good judges of the sea, I left the house where they were
and started to visit the shops, where I wanted to spend
a crown or a half-crown, for the shopkeepers are always
wide awake at Christmas time to get a shilling or two.
J never stopped till I had finished with them.

God forgive me! I went that round with the intention,
if the next morning shouldn’t prove fine, of going back
by road and leaving the drinkers in their own company, for
I was well aware that so long as they had a penny in their
pockets they’d be long enough about packing up.

I hadn't had a bite since I left the house in the morning,
nor had any of them. I found a house where I could get
some food, and had a meal. When I came out again, the
lamps were being lighted, and I went to look for my friends.
They were all gathered together in the same house—the
three uncles, Pats Heamish, Kerry, and the lad. Every one
of them had a white bag open, and the shopman was
stripped, weighing out tea, sugar, and everything else they
wanted, They filled the bags up—one man with a stone of
flour, another with a stone and a half, and a third with
two stones. In those days we only took in a small store, and
they bought all they wanted in this house.

Then we went out to the lodging-house. One of them
took food for two who didn’t. Kerry and the lad shared a
bed with me, and we had only just lain down when the
night blew up to wind and heavy rain.

“Do you hear that, my boy?’ said Kerry. ‘How far on do
you think the boat is by now?’

‘Somewhere near Ventry Harbour,’ said I.

‘If they’re as far as that, they needn’t grumble,’ said he.

As the night went on, it grew wilder, and, though I
didn’t let on, I was terrified for the boat which had left

me. And no wonder, for some others of my kin were in her,
and, besides, even if I had no relations on board, a man is
often worried about good neighbours. Before long the
house was trembling, so that none of the three of us got a
wink of sleep till the light grew in the east in the morning.

When the day was light enough to see anything, there
was a lull in the wind, and it blew towards the land from
the very point of the compass that we wanted to sail,
straight from Dingle Quay to the Blasket Harbour. I flung
myself out of bed and ran out at once into the street. I
looked towards the four quarters of the sky. The sky was
quiet now that it had got rid of its gathered fury, exactly
like the drunkards who lay there in the lodging-house and
had taken no notice of the wildness of the night or of the
coming day either.

I ran in again and went to the place where I had slept,
for half my clothes were still there, and I hadn’t so much
as gone down on my knees to thank God, who had saved
me from the night’s storm and had given us the blessed
light of day so fair again.

‘It’s a fine day,’ said I to Kerry.

The people of the house were astir at once, some of them
meaning to go to first Mass. Kerry and the lad were the
first two to come down, and he told me to wake up the
rest. I told him that, whoever went to call them, it
wouldn’t be me. I had seen all I wanted of them yesterday,
and didn’t mean to spend to-day in the same manner. As
the pair of us were conversing, who should come down the
stairs but Pats Heamish.

‘Morning, boys,’ says he.

The man of the house it was who returned his greeting.

‘How’s the day?’ says Pats.

‘A fair wind home, my lads,’ says the man of the house.

Pats turned back upstairs again to call up the rest and
before long we were all gathered together. Diarmid ordered


the woman of the house to have everything ready on the
table for us when we returned from Mass. We should be
hoisting sail on the Black Boar as soon as we had eaten.

The congregation was gathering for Mass, and, as soon
as it was over, we ate our food and went out. We took all
our things down to the harbour, ran the boat down, and
threw everything aboard. We turned her stern to land and
her prow to sea. Up went the sails, and we set out for the
west with a fair following wind.

It took the Black Boar no time to make Ventry Harbour.
As we were crossing the harbour mouth, one of the crew
glanced at the sea between us and the land.

‘There’s a boat coming out to us,” he said.

I looked closely at her and recognized her sails at once.

‘That’s the boat that left Dingle last night,’ said I.

We brought the Black Boar into the wind till the other
came up level with us, and sure enough she it was. They
told us all that had happened to them, and that all the
goods in her weren’t worth a crown, for the great sea had
swept over them, and if it hadn’t been that they had
reached harbour before the storm came, not a man of them
would ever have been seen again. We let the boats run

_side by side under their four sails, and we had a fair wind
till we reached the harbour in the Blasket. Every woman,
child, and babe was there waiting for us. The merchandise
was all taken home, and we were telling tales of the town
for a day or two. ;

I had five bottles of whisky with me—one from this man,
another from that, and one that I had bought myself.
That was easily done in those days. Half a crown a bottle
was the price. The crews of the two boats had brought
raisins, candles, and lots of sweet things from Dingle with
them. There was plenty of turf for fire that year, and
potatoes, too, and fish to eat with them.

I have already mentioned that I remembered the time

when there was only one pot-oven in this Island. There
were three or four in this year I am speaking of, and, if
there were, they had plenty to do.

Next morning my mother had one of these pot-ovens
hard at work, for it was only a week to Christmas Eve, and
she had four loaves to make for the household. We had
only just finished cooking these loaves when in came uncle
Diarmid. He had just been visiting the strand.

‘My soul from the devil, my duds are falling off me, for
I’ve had neither bite nor drop in my belly since I left
Dingle,’ says he.

I was sorry for him, and I went to a box I had and
brought a bottle and a cup and handed him a drink, He
tossed it off without drawing breath.

‘Wisha, God send me something to repay you with!’
says Diarmid.

‘Put a drop of water on the fire,’ said I to my mother,
‘and make him a cup of tea and give him a hunk of the
loaf. He made himself dizzy with drink in the town.’

‘O, for God’s sake, let me be,’ says Diarmid. “That cup
has put me on the pig’s back.’

Though a drop of drink had often before made much
merriment, I had more fun out of that drop that I’ve ever
had since.

The drink ran through every vein of him in a rush, for
his skinny frame was as thin then as a conger that would
have spent a week from Monday to Monday in a lobster-
pot. I shouldn’t have been so pleased with my bargain if
it had been early in the day when I gave him the cup, for
T should certainly have lost my day’s work, and not I only,
but everybody else who was in a position to see or hear him,
It came pretty near to people declaring that he needed
a strait waistcoat. I put my head out in the doorway, and
who should be out there but one of Diarmid’s boys,
snivelling.


“What’s wrong with you, Shaneen?’ said I.

‘I want my dad,’ says he.

*O, come in, my lad. He’s in here at the top of his form,
thinking of marrying again. He’s thinking of deserting
your mother altogether. I suppose she’s sent you to look for
him?’

I spoke thus to the boy to cheer him up a bit, for he was
the most pitiable object I’d ever seen. I took the lad by the
hand and led him up to Diarmid.

‘Is this boy yours?’ I said to the rake.

He looked at him.

‘Yes and no,’ said he.

“We know no more than we did before,’ I said to him.

*Yerra, my friend, don’t you see that he doesn’t take
after me, He wouldn’t have that tough swarthy hide if he’d
taken after me instead of that swarthy simpleton of a
mother of his.’

‘I fancy,’ said my mother, ‘that none of them take after
you. They’re all like their mother.’

“Devil a one of them all in this village!’ says Diarmid the
joker.

I jumped up and gave the boy a slice of the loaf, and
told him to run home. His father would spend a bit more
of the night with us. I’d no sooner got rid of the boy than
a woman came in through the door, and who should it be
but my sister Kate. That gave my mother a great start, for
she thought that there must be something wrong with one
of the children, for she was only a very rare visitor with us.

‘Something’s brought you here to us so late as this,’ said
I to her.

‘It’s Pats Heamish who’s not feeling very well. Since he
left Dingle he’s not had a bite to eat, and it’s for a spoonful
of whisky I’ve come,’ says she.

‘Didn’t he bring a drop with him on his way back home?’
said my mother.

‘Wisha, not he, nor anything else,’ says she.

“What should that fellow bring with him?’ says Diarmid
the cracked. ‘He hadn’t a blink of sense in Dingle from the
time he left home till he got back again.’

‘Madmen always plume themselves on their sense,’
said I.

Kate was in a hurry. I went to the bottle. She had only
brought a cup about the size of an eggshell for fear she
would drive me out of the house by asking too much. I
fetched a quarter-pint bottle and filled it up. She left me
and hurried out of the door, full of thanks and blessings.
I turned back again to Diarmid with the half-empty
bottle.

‘O, may it split me like a salmon if I taste it!’ said he.
‘I got enough in the one drink.’

I put a glass in my father’s hand, and told him to hold
it for me. I poured about halfa glass into it. My mother did
no more than just taste it. Then I filled up the glass for
myself—the first taste since I left Dingle. I filled the glass
again, and handed it to the joker.

‘O,’ said he, ‘after swearing that oath!’

“Yerra, there’s no meaning in that salmon, you fool,’
said I. ‘It’s only an expression people use.’

‘Wisha, by the Virgin, I fancy you’re right,’ says he, and
tossed it off.

He stayed with us till it was high time for bed. My
mother had never heard of the risk I ran for him in the seal
cave until he drank this last glass, and the first thing she
did when she heard was to go down on her knees and offer
up thanks to God, who had preserved the pair of us. But
my father didn’t attach all that importance to the thing.

When we’d had our meal, I went out to inquire after
Pats Heamish., I said to myself that I’d have a bit of fun
with him, too. He wasn’t far from the fire, and he had his
coat thrown over his shoulders and his pipe in his mouth,


though there was nothing but ashes in it. I asked him if he
was on the mend.

‘I am, and I'd never have been any good again but for
that drop.’

‘I fancy there’s nothing in your pipe.’

“There isn’t—and I’ve nothing to put in it either, Tom
Crohan, my boy,’ said Pats. ‘I’m suffering very much
from a glass of bad whisky I drank the day we went to
Dingle.’

‘I guess you had others inside you along with it.’

‘O, I had five glasses drunk when they ran me in,’ said
Pats.

I left him there then, Pats, the devil’s own (that’s the
best name I can give him); he’d come back home from
Dingle without a scrap for his children but what they could
beg; his health was knocked sideways, too, and, from the
look of him, he wasn’t likely to be well to-morrow or the
day after that.

When I got back home I found my trumpeter still going
full blast with no check on his flow of speech, no hoarseness
in his talk, no weariness in his movements, his tongue never
stumbling, and his appetite still unimpaired, so it seemed.
My mother was ranging up and down the floor, setting the
hearth to rights in preparation for bed.

‘By the Virgin!’ said he to her, ‘you’d do better to get
some bouncing girl for your son than be going up and
down for ever like that for yourself.’

‘Well, it isn’t me that’s keeping them from him,’ says
she. ‘I’d rather he got one by morning. But I fancy they’ re
not so easy got as all that.’

‘Yerra, your soul from the devil! aren’t there five
women back in the Inish plying their spurs after him, and
not a one of them knows which of them he'll give the wink
to to take the road with him!’

And after all his trumpeting the whole night long, his

voice was just as clear, just as lively as that of a man on a
platform beginning on his first sentence. I’d suspicioned
what the rascal was up to, when I saw him coming to the
house early in the evening, and guessed that he wouldn’t
leave the house till he’d started something of this kind, for
there had been a lot of talk in the village all the year before
about who’d marry and who wouldn’t. Besides, ’'d had a
sort of idea ever since that time with the pigs earlier in the
year that he and the old woman of the Inish were putting
their heads together about the business, and probably he’d
made her a promise that he would open up the affair.

So far as I was concerned, I wasn’t ungrateful to him for
his jabber just then, particularly if I had any reason to
think that anything would come of it; for to speak the
truth, that’s where I myself would have made my choice
at that time.

‘Agh?’ says my mother, taking up the talk again, ‘he’s
full young yet and for some time to come.’

‘Is he of age now?’ says the rake.

“Twenty-two three days before this coming Christmas,’
says she.

‘Yerra, little woman, what was I but barely twenty
when I got that swarthy lump of mine over there, and she
wasn’t much of a match,’ says he.

‘I imagine,’ I said, in answer to him, ‘that she was a
better one than yourself. It’s you that’s the comfortless
husband. Though you’ve been away from home, it’s a long
while since you brought back anything worth while to your
poor wife, and you made a miserable waste of your money.’

‘Yerra! alas for you, you fool! I’m far more of a boaster
than a waster,’ says cracked Diarmid.

‘Clear off out of my sight in the name of God and the
Virgin Mary!’ said I to him. ‘Or don’t you think at all of
your hovel or of going to bed, or are you at all afraid that
the swarthy lump will go off and leave you?’


He grinned, and ‘O!’ says he, ‘not much fear of that!’

T ran out with a box in which was a handful of potatoes
for the ass. I threw down a sheaf of oats, too, for the cow
and a calf that we had. My father told me to do this. This
was his job, but the trumpeting of the fellow in the house
had prevented him doing it that night. When I came back
again, he was still standing in the middle of the house,
demonstrating to the old couple that the young woman’s
help would be a great advantage to them, and that, so far
as he could see, this girl from the Inish had excellent stuff
in her. Though he spoke his speech like a simpleton, some
part of his advice was calculated for his own profit. He’d
have the whole house to himself, you see. The old woman
of the house was his own sister, and this girl wouldn’t be
his enemy when he himself had got her for us, of course.
Often enough in the past, and still to-day, a man has
affected the simpleton for his own ends, and I had a strong
suspicion that there was a spice of that sort of trickery in
Diarmid that day.

I had to take him by the shoulder and run him out
through the door. He turned back again into the house and
said: ‘I mean to kill a big wether on Christmas Eve, and
you shall have half of it.’

Out he went through the door, and it was high time for
bed by that.
15. A Merry Christmas

‘THERE’S A JOINT FOR YOU, LITTLE WOMAN’ -
CHRISTMAS EVE: A JOLLY DRINK AND SINGING:
THE HURLEY MATCH: DIARMID WOUNDED + THE
SECOND GAME+ TOM IS HURT: MUSIC TILL DAWN

It was the morning of Christmas Eve. ‘I fancy that I may
as well go and get a sheep,’ said I to my mother.

‘Don’t go,’ says she. ‘Give windy Diarmid his chance.
We shall find out whether he comes up to his trumpeting.
If he kills that big sheep there’ll be enough for the two
houses in her, but I’m afraid he won’t made good his
swaggering.’

She had far less confidence in him than I had. I expected
that he’d keep his promise, if he did lay the big sheep low.
He was a finished butcher, for those brothers had a big
household when they kept house together. And often
enough had the joker put a knife in a fine sheep of their
flock without anybody telling him to.

I strolled out late in the evening to look if the cows were
coming down from the hill, and what should I see but the
rascal coming to the house with half the big sheep on his
back. Diarmid had split the sheep so cleanly in two that
half the head was still sticking to half the body.

When he went in, he threw off his load.

‘There’s a joint for you, little woman, for the Holy Day,’
says he.

‘May this day a year hence find you and us all in
prosperity and joy,’ said she.

Just at that moment in I came. I looked at the present.

‘Yerra, a blessing on your arms, good old uncle!’ said I.
*You’re a man of your word if anybody is.’

‘Didn’t I tell you that I’d do it?’ said he. ‘Sure, if it


hadn’t been for you and the help of God, I shouldn’t have
been alive to kill it. It’s in honour of God that I killed it,
and to share it with you. I shall never forget the seals’
cave!’

I turned away from him and went to the box. I took out
one of the four bottles that remained there, and came up
to him.

‘There, you’ve earned this drink to-day if you ever did,
Diarmid.’

‘Mary Mother! wherever did you get it all?’ says he.

‘Didn’t you get a bottle from your friends yourself?’

‘Devil a one except one my old friend Muirisin Ban
gave me.’

Well, I filled him a glass and a half, for that was the full
of the vessel I held in my hand.

‘O, King of the Angels! don’t you know that my old
skeleton can’t take in all that at one gulp after the day’s
toil?’

‘This is the little Christmas drink.’

He seized the glass, and before long all its contents were
in a place that kept them safe, and he said directly:

‘I hope with God that we shall have a good Christmas
and a good Shrove to follow.’

Then he jumped up and ran out through the door.

I ran after him and brought him in again.

‘Yerra, aren’t you in a hurry?’ said I.

‘O! says he, ‘to-night isn’t like other nights, and it
isn’t right for me to fail my own little crowd on God’s
Blessed Eve.’

I'd always thought that he wasn’t so devout as he
showed himself that day, for he was always a rough-
tongued chap, and it was his constant habit to go seeking
help from hell whenever he was in a rage. His expressions
that day increased the respect I had for him. After a bit he
went off.

When the time for lighting up came on ‘God’s Blessed
Eve’, if you were coming towards the village from the
south-east—for that’s the direction in which every door
and window faces—and every kind of light is ablaze that
night, you would imagine it a wing of some heavenly
mansion, though it is set in the middle of the great sea.
You would hear a noise in every house that night, for,
however much or little drink comes to the Island, it is put
aside for Christmas Eve. Maybe an old man would be
singing who’d never lifted his voice for a year. As for the
old women, they’re always lilting away.

I felt that I would rather go out a bit than spend the
whole evening at home. The place I meant to go to was
Pats Heamish’s house for a bit, for he wasn’t too well yet.
I knew that he hadn’t got a drop of drink, so I got a half-
pint. There was a score or so of welcomes waiting for me.
He was a man you could get a great deal of sport out of,
but he was anything but happy, as he hadn’t got a drop
for Christmas, He’d drunk up all that he’d brought with
him from Dingle, as his health had gone to pieces after the
carouse.

I handed him the half-pint.

‘Drink that down,’ said I to him, ‘for you’ve got to sing
a song.’ ;

‘You'll get no song,’ says Kate, ‘if he once gets the half-
pint down.’

‘Ill sing a song, too,’ says Tom.

He drank a tot and sang, not one song, but seven of
them.

On Christmas Day and during the Christmas season we
used to have hurley matches, and the whole village used
to be mixed up in the game. Two men were chosen, one
from each side, for captains. Each of them would call up
man by man in turn until all who were on the strand were
distributed in the two sides. We had hurleys and a ball.


The game was played on the White Strand without shoes
or stockings, and we went in up to our necks whenever
the ball went into the sea. Throughout the twelve days of
Christmas time there wasn’t a man able to drive his cow to
the hill for the stiffness in his back and his bones; a pair
or so would have a bruised foot, and another would be
limping on one leg for a month.

That Christmas Day my two uncles, Diarmid and Tom,
were on opposite sides. I was on Diarmid’s side, and that’s
where I preferred to be, for, if I had chanced to be against
him, I couldn’t have put out half my strength if I had been
anywhere near him.

We won three games from them, one after another, and
the two sides were raging—they struggling to win one
game, anyhow, in the day and the other side swaggering.

When we were approaching the cliff path on our way
home, ‘O, shame on you!’ says uncle Diarmid, ‘we didn’t
let you win a single game since morning.’

When Diarmid made that remark, his brother Tom was
going up the path, just in front of him. He turned down,
and, raising his fist, gave him a blow in the ear-hole that
sent him down on to the strand a cold corpse or nearly.

‘Sure, you little devil, it wasn’t you that did it.’

He hadn’t far to fall, but it was rough ground. He lost
his speech, for it was knocked clean out of him, and it was
an hour before he could talk, with all the others about him
on the strand, all except the man who hit him—he’d gone
home. Before long his feeble voice began to strengthen, and
when it came back he made no good use of it, for the first
thing he said was: ‘On my body and soul, I swear I'll be
the priest at that fellow’s deathbed!’

They set him on his feet, and he wasn’t long in coming
to himself. He only had a scratch or two on his cheek. We
went off home, and it was as much as we could do, we
were so tired after the day.

We didn’t do much after the great match on Christmas
Day, but everyone was pretty well lamed; their feet and
their bones were sore, but we had a week’s rest till New
Year’s Day. Those whose hurleys were broken looked out
new ones.

Very nearly all the hurleys on the strand came from
Ventry parish. They were made of furze stems that had a
crook in them, and the ball was made of stocking wool,
sewn with a hempen thread. Often it would hit some tall
fellow on the ankle, and he’d have no more use of his foot
for that day. Whether I was strong or not, I didn’t use my
hurley clumsily. I happened to be on the outer edge of the
game on New Year’s Day, and I swiped the ball as hard
as I could, and who should be in its way but my uncle
Tom, and where should the ball hit him but on the knee-
cap. It put his knee-cap out of joint.

‘Good for your arm,’ says Diarmid, the first voice I
heard.

Diarmid thought that his brother was not so badly hurt,
but, when he saw that he was, the merry note of his
trumpeting dropped a bit. People had to support my
uncle home, and Diarmid saw to it that he got there.

As I was returning to my house, who should follow me
along the path but Diarmid, and you wouldn’t have paid
twopence for him after the tiring day. I waited till he came
up with me.

‘T’ve got a bit of a job still for you,’ said I to him.

He didn’t care what the job was, but went along with me.

My mother mentioned Tom’s leg to him. Hadn’t it got
a bad knock, she said, and it would be useless all this year:
the knee-cap’s a bad place, and very often it doesn’t ever go
back at all.

‘He'll make a fine cripple!’ says Diarmid.

‘Is that all the sympathy you have for him?’ said my
mother,


‘It’s only a week since he shed my blood for little
provocation,’ said Diarmid. ‘Let him come to himself—
though I’m sorry for the children.’

After they’d said this much I went to the box and fetched
a good big bottle that was still unopened. When Diarmid
saw it, he thought that it had fallen from Heaven. I gave
him a glass, and he didn’t refuse it, for he had no excuse to,
and when it was down in the place that stood in need of it,
he said:

‘My soul from the devil! sure I should have been ready
for burial this day if it hadn’t been for whatever moved
you to bring so much of it with you: I fancy it must have
been Providence itself.’

‘Agh! I got most of it as a gift, Diarmid,’ said I.

‘Your soul from the devil! wasn’t I buying their goods
before you were born, and they gave me little enough ofit,’
says he.

‘I expect they see that you’re failing, and that it wouldn’t
be of any advantage to them to bribe you to get anything
out of you!”

‘May God give them nothing, the pack of rascals!’
said he.

When I had my uncle as I wanted him—and that was
when the drink had called to life his feeble voice—I said
that I would pay a visit to Pats Heamish. Though he
wasn’t yet free of the sickness he got in Dingle, he was in
the hurley game every day; and he wasn’t much good at it
that Christmas—a thing you could never have said of him
before that. I reflected that a noggin of whisky wouldn’t
last long, and that I should get its value in fun out of Pats,
so I took it with me and went to the house. I was willing
to share with Pats, for, if he’d had it, I should certainly
have had my share of it.

After I’d been there for a while I said at last:

‘There’s neither song nor story in this house to-night,

and oughtn’t there to be some sort of goings on on New
Year’s Eve?’

‘The man of the house isn’t feeling too well yet,’ said
Kate.

‘I expect he feels the lack of his rights,’ said I. ‘If he had
something to lighten his heart, maybe there’d be some
sport or other going.’

‘Devil a lie in that, Tomas Crohan,’ said Pats, ‘whatever
pains we have in our bones besides.’

T ran to the cup that was hanging up on the dresser and
brought it with me. I poured a mouthful into it and gave
it to him. There was no need to press it on him, and before
long he was singing ‘Bab na gCraobh’, and he went on
from one song to another.

Soon I heard the noise of boots approaching, and I
thought it was my father coming to call me in to a meal,
but when he stuck his head in, who should it be but
Diarmid.

‘Your meal’s ready,’ said he to me. He had one of his
boys with him who had come to summon him home, but
Diarmid didn’t want to go home at all, and what he did
was to sit down on a stool with only three legs.

‘Wisha!’ says he, ‘I suppose you don’t know a verse of
the “Suisin Ban’? It’s a long time since I heard it.’

‘Yerra, sorrow on your heart!’ said I to him. ‘Surely you
won’t stay to listen to that song when a boy has called you
for your potatoes an hour ago.’

‘God knows, if he sings it, I'll stay, and for another one
after that, and till the light comes out of the east to-
morrow,’ said the lunatic. ‘What is it to you? All you’ve
got to do is to be off to your meal.’

Though he hadn’t done what I said, I did what he said,
and went out and left them there with not a thing in the
wide world troubling the pair of them. When I got home,
my potatoes were pretty well stone-cold.


‘It’s a pity you didn’t stay a while longer,’ said my
mother, ‘or did the rake give you a call?’

‘He did, and the hound’s outrun the messenger,’ said I.
‘He’s there still.’

‘Mary Virgin! isn’t he the useless man,’ said she.

When I had eaten my meal, the bee began to sting me
again to go to the house where the fun was. I reflected that
that night wouldn’t come again till the end of another
year.

Thinking so, I told my mother that I was going to Pats
Heamish’s house, and if I should be late in returning, not
to worry over it.

‘I wonder,’ said I to the old couple, ‘whether I’d
better take a drop with me to Kate’s house?’ I was
just trying it on with them to see what they’d make of it.
I'd rather hear what my father had to say, for he’d
never grumble at anybody unless he was doing something
outrageous.

‘Often has a man had a good drink in an enemy’s house,
and sure your own sister’s house is not the house of an
enemy: and if your uncle is there, too, isn’t it all in the
family?’

I went out at the door. I shouldn’t have been at ease
with my heart in it if the old couple weren’t willing. I
could hear the jester a long way from the house.

‘Wisha! welcome here anyhow!’ said he.

‘Haven't you gone home yet?’ said I.

‘Devil a step!’ said he. ‘I have plenty of friends, God
be thanked for it, all over the village. I make myself at
home in lots of the houses. I’ve had my food here, my lad,
and drink to go with it.’

“Have you had any singing since?’

‘Yes, five songs: and now we'll have some more since
you’ve come to us again. This is a night of our life, and we
don’t know who'll be alive when it returns again.’

I poured out a dram for them. Diarmid seized the cup
and made to sing, and this was his song:

‘°Tis the best of the doctor’s prescriptions
If whisky and porter are cheap,

For it cures us of all our afflictions
And puts all men’s sorrows to sleep.

And the old woman, wheezing and groaning,
A-bed for a year in despair,

When she sups her half-pint, stops her moaning,
And kicks the bedclothes in the air.’

All of us in the house shook his hand, seven times over,
as no hand had ever been shaken before, when he’d
finished the verse.

‘You sing a song, Pats,’ I said to the other man. He sang
‘Eamonn Magaine’, and it delighted me, for he had a fine
voice—that is to say, when he’d cleared his throat with
the right stuff. Then the rake sang ‘Cosa buidhe arda
dearga’. He sprang to his feet, and ‘Wisha,’ said he, ‘God’s
blessing on the souls of your dead, sing me “The Quilt”.
I’ve never heard the whole of it together since the poet
Dunlevy let it out of his lips.’

I didn’t require much pressing, though ‘The Quilt’ tried
me hard. I sang eighteen verses of it.

‘O, King of Glory! eternal praise be to Him! How on
earth did he put it all together?’ said Diarmid.

So we went on till the day lightened over us from the
east. The day was breaking when we parted from one
another.

‘I pray God that no blot or blame may befall you till
the year’s end,’ said Diarmid, facing eastwards to his own
house. My way led west. I went to bed, and it was dinner
time when I woke again.

The afternoon came on cold and stormy, and my father
said to me:


‘You'd better go up for the cows, since you’ve nothing
else to do.’

I threw my coat over my shoulders and started up the
hill. When I reached the place where the cows were, there
were others before me there, and among them was the
poet, with a stick in his hand, for he had a cow in those
days whose like was never seen at a fair: a handsome, jet-
black cow, that filled three firkins of butter every year that
she was in good trim. He had a fine heifer, too.

‘Well,’ says I to myself, ‘the poet shan’t waste my day
to-day as he did that day he met me, when he kept me
from cutting the turf.’

We hadn’t run across one another on the hill since then
till now.

‘Have you got any of the “Song of the Ass”’? said he to me.

‘Part of it ve got, and part not,’ said I.

‘Have you got any paper in your pocket? If you have,
out with it, and your pencil, too. I shall carry all the songs
I ever made to the grave with me if you don’t pick them

up.’

I wasn’t too pleased with what he said, for I didn’t want
to sit down by a tussock on a cold and chilly evening. But
it wouldn’t take the poet long to compose a verse on me
that wouldn’t do me any good! So all of us there threw
ourselves down by a low fence, and my fine fellow started
to sing his song.

I promise you, friend of my heart, that by the time I had
a dozen verses written down that bitter, cold evening I
wished heartily that the poet was dead, for, whoever found
his ways easy to deal with, it wasn’t me, and before I had
the poem scribbled down on my paper it was black night.

Off we all started to go home. The cows had got there
before us!

‘Yerra,’ says my mother, ‘whatever kept you so long
after the cows, a cold, stormy evening like this?’

I told her the truth.

‘Well, the poet himself needed all the sense he has to stay
out on a hill-top till now,’ says she. ‘Your food’s cold now.’

I gulped down a dozen potatoes that were pretty cold,
only that I had a drop of warm milk and some hot fish with
them, and then I ran out again. There was a special house
in the village that the young folk, boys and girls, used to
gather in and stay till midnight. To give some account of
that house and the young people that used to gather
together in it, I am proud to be able to say that nothing
wrong ever happened among them for the sixty-seven years
that I’ve known it.

We spent the night sporting together till it was very late.
Then I came home and went to bed.
16. Shrovetide, 1878

MATCHES AND WEDDING FEASTS: A QUANDARY >
MY MARRIAGE: RESPONSIBILITY : WORK:
CHILDREN AND TROUBLE

Surove came early that year (1878), and the Islanders
had to set about making their matches sooner than the
mainlanders, you see. So one pair set out quickly. I don’t
think the matter of the dowry held them back very long,
for there wasn’t any on either side.

When this party got as far as the priest’s house, and it
was time for the marriage to begin, the girl couldn’t be
found anywhere, dead or alive, though there was a crowd
hunting for her. A man from Dunquin who’d come to
Ballyferriter for another marriage told them that he had met
her on her way back. They sent a man on horseback to catch
up with her, but, when he got to Dunquin, she had set sail
for the Blasket in a boat that was going out fishing.

She hadn’t been home many days when she started out
again with a man she preferred to the first one. Very few
people accompanied them, for they thought it rather an
odd proceeding. The girl had no one with her. Though
there wasn’t a pin to choose between the two men, it’s
plain the girl had some good reason for preferring one to
the other, The boy she’d jilted didn’t leave his oars idle.
He went as far as Tralee for a wife—the daughter of a
Dunquin widow who was in service there.

I used to put up at the same farm-house in Dunquin as
this young fellow, for I had one or two relations there. It
happened that bad weather kept us out there after this
comic wedding I’ve just mentioned. For I had gone to
the marriage, and I was a near relation of the girl’s, too,
though I didn’t quarrel with her for doing what she did.

Before we got a chance to go home, the beauty from
Tralee was in Dunquin.

Next morning the young fellow who'd been jilted came
in at the door of the house where I was.

‘I suppose,’ he said, ‘that you wouldn’t care to go to
Ballyferriter with me.’ That’s where the priest lived.

“Why do you think I wouldn’t?’ said I.

‘O, because you’ve only just been there; and, besides,
your relative and I didn’t make a job of it together.’

‘What’s that to you so long as you get another wife?’
said I.

‘Wisha, on my baptism, maybe you're right! But I
haven’t got her yet,’ said he.

When we got to Ballyferriter there was a great crowd
there—men with a thirst, thimble-riggers, and merry-
makers. When the Blasket couple came up for their
marriage, their own company came with them. That’s
the time I made the acquaintance of the girl, and I give
you my word, if she’d come from Dublin itself, she
wouldn’t have shamed the city.

The first place we went to after the chapel was the
public-house, where there was a great uproar of drinking
and dancing and singing, and every other sport that serves
to pass the time. When it was getting on for ten o’clock
the people were beginning to scatter. You would see a man
going off supported between two others, and the woman
that belonged to him following behind with a lot to say.

The two wedding parties came back home the same day.
They had enough provisions of every sort with them for the
whole Island, and all the people of the village revelled and
made merry in the two houses. I doubt whether so many
Irish songs were ever sung at any two weddings as at those
two. Voices were never still till high noon on the morrow in
the two houses. Only the girl from Tralee sang a song or
two in English. Her father-in-law danced on a table, and


they had to smear it with soap for him, as a lot of people
had been dancing on it before him. He was a marvellous
dancer, but he’d had a drop to drink, and he hadn’t been
capering long when he upset, but, all the same, he
recovered his stand on the floor and finished the step as
prettily as P’ve ever seen it done.

It’s still the custom in the Blasket—as it always has been
~—that, if any of them start on anything, all the rest are
eager to follow. Some years the whole Island gets married,
and for seven years after that, there won’t be a single
wedding. I refer to this year of which I’m talking—for not
a single boy or girl was unmarried by the time Shrove
was over.

One night after I’d been out—and it was pretty late on
in the night, too—whom should I find in the house when
I came in but windy Diarmid, and his voice was going as
loud as ever I’d heard it; he was getting at the old couple,
explaining what an unhandy thing it’d be for them if they
spent another year without a soul to help them-—‘and
maybe two years,’ says he; ‘and I’ve got a proposal for you
from the best girl that ever broke bread, the finest and the
handsomest girl every way.’

They didn’t break off the talk after I came in, and we
kept it up till you’d have thought that everybody in the
house was in complete agreement; though the whole affair
was to be gone into again, for all the advisers were not
present. Be that as it may, Diarmid went out, and he could
have trodden on a shell-less egg without breaking it. He
fancied that the bargain was sealed.

My sister Maura, who had been in America and who
had come back home and married again, heard that
Diarmid the rake had been in our house with a match on
his hands, and she came to see if there was any truth in the
story. We told her how things stood, and she didn’t like
the idea at all; she made it plain to the old couple what
Authoor AND TRANSLATOR

ROOFED ISLAND HOUSE



a responsibility anyone was taking on himself if he didn’t
marry near home, but made an alliance with a family that
lived a long way off and wouldn’t be in a position to lend
a hand on a rainy day.

She had herself marked down an excellent, knowledge-
able girl, whose people lived in the village, so that they
could lend us a hand when we needed it, and she went on
to explain the whole affair to us, like a woman reciting a
litany, till she had the whole lot of us as tame as a cat.

She’d always had a great hankering after her first
husband’s people, and his brother’s daughter it was that
she’d marked down for us. The girl she had such high
praise for—and she deserved it—was a sister to the man
who is the King of the Blasket to-day—though he hadn’t
got the title of King in those days or for long after. My
sister Maura, who made the match, has been in the grave
since December 1923. She was eighty when she died. May
her soul inherit Heaven!

A week from that day we were married—Tomas
Crohan and Maura Keane—in the last week of Shrove in
the year 1878. There never was a day like it in Ballyferriter.
There were four public-houses there, and we spent some
time in all of them until it was very late in the day. The
town was packed with people, for there were a lot of other
couples being married. There were five fiddlers there, one
in each bar, attracting people to himself, while another of
them was not in any of the houses but out in the middle of
the street, and he made more than the rest, for most of the
people were in the street.

We had to leave Ballyferriter at last, just when the fun
was at its height, but since the great sea was before us, and
there were a lot of us to take across, we had to go.

Many of the mainlanders went in with us—relations of
ours. There was singing in plenty, dancing, and all sorts of
amusement, and food and drink enough and to spare, till


high noon on the morrow. Then the mainlanders cleared
off.

It was said that there hadn’t been so many marriages
for fifteen years. The rest of the year was given to hard
work. It was a great year for fish. They weren’t catching
mackerel or lobsters, but other fish which they went after
in the day-time in big boats with a seine net in each boat,
and the farmers of the countryside bought the catch from
them.

I had been frequenting school—whenever we could get
one—until I was eighteen. They had no great need of me
at home for all that time, as I had a married brother in the
house. His wife died and left two children. My mother
looked after them till they could go by themselves. My
brother went to America. Then I had to leave school, for
there was only my father at home. I had left school for
three years when I married, at the age of twenty-two.

Till that day I had known little of the world’s responsi-
bilities, but from that time on they came upon me. Every-
thing I had to do with changed from that day. Marriage
makes a great change in a man’s life. His disposition and
his view of all sorts of things alters, and, above all, it whets
his appetite to be up and doing in life. As the phrase goes,
I used to fancy, up till then, that food was sent from
Heaven to us.

T set to work with keenness. Away I went to the strand
to get seaweed for manure so that we could have more
potatoes to rear pigs on. We had two cows at this time. At
daybreak, stripped of everything but my drawers, with a
rake to gather the weed, out I'd go up to my neck in the
sea; then I had to carry it up to the top of the cliff, carry
it to the field and spread it. I had no tea or sugar in those
days, only milk, bread, and fish, I would be as early on hill
as on strand—now off to sea, now hunting seals, another
time out in the big boat with a seine net. Each of these

jobs had its own time. The seal chase was pretty dangerous.
At a certain period of the year men would race one another
to them. On one of these days there would be a heavy
swell in Poll na Baise, and a man could only make his way
into that cave by turning on his side and trying to swim in,
or one must go into a sea-cleft and make a shift to kill the
huge seals and fetch them out through that narrow open-
ing. I’ve told already how one day I nearly lost my life
when the rope had broken and my uncle was drowning.

Since the day of my marriage I was always trying my
best to provide for my household and get my share of
everything that was going. For a long time to come my
father was a great help to me in the house and out.

Ten children were born to us, but they had no good
fortune, God help us! The very first of them that we
christened was only seven or eight years old when he fell
over the cliff and was killed. From that time on they went
as quickly as they came. Two died of measles, and every
epidemic that came carried off one or other of them. Donal
was drowned trying to save the lady off the White Strand.
I had another fine lad helping me. Before long I lost him,
too.

All these things were a sore trouble to the poor mother,
and she, too, was taken from me. I was never blinded
altogether till then. May God spare us the light of our
eyes! She left a little babe, only I had a little girl grown up
to take care of her; but she, too, was only just grown up
when she heard the call like the rest. The girl who had
brought her up married in Dunmore. She died, too, leaving
seven children. I have only one boy left at home with me
now. There is another in America. Such was the fate of my
children. May God’s blessing be with them—those of them
that are in the grave—and with the poor woman whose
heart broke for them.
17. Work and Wandering

WORK AND WANDERING : WITH THE SEINE NET:
THE YOUNG GANNETS ON THE SKELLIG: BOATS
AND CANOES AND TANK SHIPS: A TRIP TO
CAHIRSIVEEN SELLING FISH « ‘COME ALONG,
BLASHKET MAN!’ ANOTHER TRIP TO VALENCIA
ISLAND TO FETCH A BOAT

THERE were seven seine boats in Dunquin in those days
and two fine big boats in the Blasket, and, though the
mainland tribe and the Island people were close of kin and
much intermarried, they were always at odds over the
fishing.

One day the boats from the two places were all gathered
at Inishtooshkert. The fish were shoaling in great num-
bers. The custom was that each pair of boats had the
right to shoot the nets in turn. Two boats had to attend to
the seine net every time it was shot, one boat paying it out
and the other keeping it out of danger. If there was fish in
the net, it was a slow business to get it into the boat, as the
weight of the fish and the run of the tide were always carry-
ing it on to the rocks.

We had shot the net round the shoal, and, though the
tide was running wildly, our two boats handled the net so
smartly that it was out of danger before it had a chance to
run on the rocks, and there was enough fish in it to fill one
of the boats. That left the Dunquin people nothing to say,
and the captain of our boat signed to them to shoot their
net, or he would shoot his at once as soon as the seine was
cleared. Rather than let the Island boat have its second
shot, the Dunquin boat put its net out, and it hadn’t been
out long when the run of the tide began to carry it on to
the rocks: there were crags and sharp points of rock waiting
for it, and a strong spring tide was running.

Before long the boat which had the end of the net let it
go, and off they went, both boat and seine net, through
the channel northwards. None of the other Dunquin boats
followed her, for they were afraid to—that same channel
wasn’t a thing to play with at that moment.

‘On my soul and body?’ cried our captain, ‘sure the boat
from Coomeenole is lost. Get ready your oars,’ said he to
the Island boat, ‘and we’ll go to her assistance.’

They trimmed their oars at once, and away went the
two boats through the sound to the north, and the swell
was storming the sky. The boats were through the passage
in two minutes, and when we came in sight of the other
boat she hadn’t gone under yet—but that was all there was
to it: she was full of water, and they were bailing hard to
keep her from sinking.

The seine net was still in the water, for the boat couldn’t
carry it. Our captain told us to take the net into our own
boat until the other boat had been bailed out, and then to
put it aboard her. When she was dry we put the net aboard.

We had a boatful of fish in the two boats. We had to tie
the Dunquin boat to us with a rope, and then the two
boats must tow her through the passage southwards, which
she had been carried through northwards. Our captain
cursed the Dunquin people again and again for deserting
the boat, and he cursed the boat he had saved as well for
shooting their net.

If I ever got a big job of work done any day, it wasn’t
the days when I was cutting turf, particularly so long as
the poet lived, and was able to go on the hill. He was
pitifully old at this time when he was herding the black
cow on the mountain.

One day, when I was just getting down to my work on
the south side of the Island—a warm day of sun and
pleasantness—I’d been cutting for a bit, but not for long,
when I heard a voice above me. I recognized it all right,


and, may God forgive me, I’d no great hankering after its
owner, not that I disliked him, but because he always
turned my days into idle ones.

‘Yerra, stop a bit, the day’s long,’ said the poet, who
was coming from the north side of the hill at the moment
when he spotted me.

‘Do you see those rocks to the south?’ said he. “Those
are the Skelligs. My father spent a day fighting in them
once.’

‘How did that come about?’ said I. And if I lacked
knowledge when I put the question, I didn’t lack it long,
for the poet was eager to tell the tale, lying there with his
belly turned up to the sun:

‘The young of the gannet are called “corrai’’, and, when
they are in season, they are all fat. All the gannets hatch
on the smallest of the Skelligs, and you never saw anything
like the crowds of young birds there. A boat with a crew
of twelve men used to be guarding the rock, well paid by
the man who owned it. This time a boat set sail from
Dunquin at night with eight men in her, my father among
them, and they never rested till they got to the rock at
day-break. They sprang up it and fell to gathering the
birds into the boat at full speed; and it was easy to collect
a load of them, for every single one of those young birds
was as heavy as a fat goose.

‘The captain stopped them then, saying that the boat
was full enough and that they must go aboard and be
making the. best of their way home. So they did at once,
and away they went, leaving the rock with their big boat
full of fat birds, and they were in fine spirits for the
journey home.

‘As they were turning the point of the rock to strike out
into the bay, what should they see coming to meet them
but the guard boat; they hadn’t seen one another till that
moment. The guard boat ran up along their gunwale at

once, and they commanded them to throw the birds into
their own boat in a jiffy; and even that wouldn’t get them
off, for they must go with them as prisoners, and their boat,
too; and, if they didn’t find a rope round their necks, they
would have no reason to complain!

‘But the Dunquin men didn’t throw the birds in to
them, and so one of the guards jumped on board and tied
a rope to the stern and they began to tow them swiftly and
strongly, them and their boat and their birds, towards the
land.

‘They had gone on so for about a quarter of a mile when
a man in the bird boat suddenly jumped up and laid an
axe to the rope that was tied to the stern of his boat, and
that put the guards in a wild rage. They turned on the
other boat, and some of them sprang on board and they
fell to hitting at one another with oars and hatchets, and
any weapon they could find in the boat, till they bled one
another like a slaughtered ox.

‘The bird boat won the fight, though it was twelve to
eight. The eight Dunquin men knocked the other crew
about till they couldn’t stir hand or foot. They sprang into
the boat and plugged the rowlock holes, and towed them
out some distance into the bay, intending to leave them at
the sea’s mercy, boat and all, so as to finish them alto-
gether. There was a widow’s son in the guard boat who had
never Jifted hand or foot in the fight.

‘“Tt’s a shameful thing to send me to my death when
I never interfered with you,’ said he.

‘The captain of the other boat said to him: “If we set
the sail for you, do you think you could get home to shore
with it?” He said he could. Two men went on board and
set the sail to rights for him, and he faced her towards his
own landing-place.

‘The Dunquin boat got back to its own harbour, its
crew cut and gashed and mangled, their boat full of fat


young gannets and they themselves not too easy in their
minds.’

‘And,’ said I to the poet, ‘have you any tale to tell of the
Iveragh boat?’

‘I have. The man they hoisted the sail for got her to
shore. Two of them were dead, and the rest were sent into
hospital, After that they were less keen on that sort of chase
and the guard was taken off the rock, and those birds are
no longer eaten in these days.’

He told this long tale fine and easy, without effort or
haste. Then he said:

‘Maybe we may as well do a little more cutting in the
bog, it isn’t long till dinner time.’ And he sprang up and
cleared off from me up the hill.

When I myself jumped up after he had gone and saw
where the sun had got to, I was in a very bad temper—the
best part of the day was spent and I hadn’t yet cut three
ass-loads of turf. Where was all the work I had promised
myself I would do when I left the house in the morning?
And another thought ran through my mind: was I myself
fated beyond all the people in the Island to have all my
time wasted by the poet?—for I never saw him frequenting
any of the others, but only me. These thoughts made a
great change in me, so that I determined the very next
time he should run into me that I wouldn’t speak a word
to him, and then he’d have to leave me. But that is a plan
that I never carried into action, and I’m glad of it.

At that time there wasn’t a single canoe here or any of
the gear to suit them, only big boats that were always
managed by a crew of eight. Each boat carried a big,
heavy seine net, with stones tied to the bottom of the net
to sink it, and corks on the upper rope to keep the top of
the net on the surface. There were little boats, too, used by
old men and young lads for line fishing, and they would
often be full of the sort of fish that is caught that way.

Somebody said one day that two of the Islanders had
gone to a fair in Dingle, and that they had bought a canoe
from a man when they were drunk. Before long we saw her
coming, and we marvelled at her. The women whose
husbands were in her began a long, soft, musical lament
when they saw the quill of a boat that they were in. But
two of the young lads went up to them and said:

*Yerra, keep your senses, couldn’t two of us do the job
for you just as well even if they are drowned?’

I never heard such a cursing as the two lads got from
the two keening women, for they thought that it was for
lack ofsympathy they mocked them. I was near the women
at this moment, and I had a good laugh at the boys’ joke.
Isn’t it ready they were to take up with the two wailing
women the very moment their husbands should have left
them?

A day or two after this I went up the hill to fetch a load
of turf, and what should I see but this very canoe, I
thought, down below me, full of some objects which they
were throwing into the sea. But I drove on and brought
down the load of turf. But it wasn’t the canoe the two men
had brought at all, for that one was in the Island creek.

Nothing more happened till the evening, when the
canoe came round the Gob from the south with four men
in her, who carried her up the Island quay and began to
inquire for lodgings. They had a few potatoes and ‘kitchen’
with them in a white bag. They found a house to put up in.
They were from Dingle, and, of course, we knew them
well.

They stayed in Pats Heamish’s house, and they had
brought their own food with them, intending only to
spend a week at a time, as they had to go home with the
catch. The things I had seen them throwing into the sea
were pots to catch lobsters. The Blasket people were as
strange to that sort of fishing tackle as any bank clerk at


that time. Not much of the year had gone before there
were four Dingle canoes fishing lobsters round the Blasket
after this fashion. The Dingle fishermen took hundreds of
pounds worth of lobsters from the waters round the Island
before we had any notion how to make a shilling out of
them. They fetched a pound the dozen, and, to make the
story better, the dozen was easy got.

When the people found out how it was done the two
who had bought the canoe put pots into her. They took
another lad in with them. They fished for a year—the only
boat from the Island—and made money. Next year off
went the crews, racing one another to get canoes, and they
were difficult to come by, for very few were being built.
Every new one cost from eight to ten pounds. I went off
like the rest to get one, and Pats Heamish went with me.
We took another good fellow with us. I found a canoe
easily enough, just built, in the hands of a relation of mine,
and for eight pounds we brought it away with us. We had
to go out again after withes to make the pots with, and
we had had plenty of trouble by the time they were catch-
ing fish for us. We rubbed through the season and the fine
weather with them, and we had ten pounds apiece after
paying for the canoe.

Merchants from Dingle used to buy the lobsters from us
in those days, and others of us used to send them to market
on our own. They made an excellent fishery, for the seine
fishing had failed by this.

When there were a dozen canoes fishing lobsters in this
Island, people in England got to hear about it, and a
company there sent a tank boat to serve the place. A tank
boat is a boat or vessel which has a device to allow the sea
to flow in and out in part of the hull to preserve the
lobsters alive there.

Pats Heamish and I applied ourselves to the lobster
fishing early and late. They fetched ten shillings a dozen

for a good part of the year, and when they grew scarce the
price was a shilling apiece. It went on like this for two or
three years, and another company in England dispatched
another ship to the Blasket which offered a shilling extra
a dozen for them. The new man was the man for us, you
may be sure, particularly as he raised the price. Half the
canoes went to one and half to the other, so as to keep
them going.

Lobsters were plentiful in those days. In a few years’
time boats from France began to call, offering a shilling
a fish all through the year. So they went on till there were
five companies blowing their horns off the Blasket coast in
quest of lobsters.

A few years went by like this, and the fishers didn’t want
for shillings, as the boats came to our very threshold with
yellow gold on board to pay for the catch, however big the
haul might be. Just at the time that these companies were
sending their boats to us, the talk was beginning through-
out Ireland about.self-government, or Home Rule, as it is
called in another language. I often told the fishermen that
Home Rule had come to the Irish without their knowing
it, and that the first beginning of it had been made in the
Blasket now that the yellow gold of England and France
was coming to our thresholds to purchase our fish, and we
didn’t give a curse for anybody.

Nobody knows how much gold and silver those ships
left along the Kerry coast in those days; while in the rest
of the year there were other merchants to buy mackerel
and steamships were chartered by them to carry them
fresh all over the world. One night in March I got five or
six hundred May mackerel and brought them to the
Dingle quay. We got four pounds a hundred for them.

So long as those ships were coming to the coast, no poor
man wanted for a pound. Lobsters were to be caught every
season. Shoals of fish swimming on the surface were to be


caught at night in part of every year, and we did very well
with them, for we had the big boats and all the tackle after
the seine fishery had failed.

One of these years we had had a great haul overnight,
and when we had cured the fish—great heaps of it—there
was no sale for it in Dingle. A report ran through the
countryside that there was a great demand for fish in
Cahirsiveen, for it was scarce there. Then the crew of our
boat began to stir one another up, arguing that we were
a poor lot if we didn’t load up our boat with it, set her sails,
and be off with her southwards through Dingle Bay, for it
was there we should sell our fish soonest.

Next Monday in the morning we filled up the Black Boar
with salted mackerel—of fish that wasn’t very large or
coarse. We had a fair wind blowing to the south to fill our
sails till we reached the lighthouse in the mouth of Valencia
harbour, and from there on to Cahirsiveen.

When we reached the quay there, a crowd came to meet
us. We wanted to find out if there were any buyers of fish
in the place, and we were told that there were; some of
them were on the spot. One of them started to offer for the
fish, but the price he offered was less than our expectations.
Another man came down the slip and welcomed us
heartily. He had the manners and the way of a gentleman.
He called us out of the boat and gave us a drink and
bought all the fish in the boat for a crown the hundred, and
brought us to his father’s house in the middle of the town
for a lodging. We had some food there, and then we
handed over the fish to the man who had bought it, and
when we had finished with one another and he had paid us,
he stood us one drink after another and wouldn’t take
anything from us.

We found our lodgings again, and we asked the host by
his leave would we have time to take a stroll through the
town. He said that there was more than an hour and we

should have plenty of time. Off went three of us in
company, for the rest in the boat were well on in years and
had no taste for sightseeing. We went into a fine shop where
drink was to be had and looked round us there. After a bit
we came out and spent some time amusing ourselves by
walking up and down the street. When it was time for
everybody to be going to his own place, we returned to our
lodgings, and about half-way there, at a street corner,
three women came up to us, the three most upstanding, the
strongest and the handsomest women for shape and build
that any of the three of us had ever seen.

One of us had a grey head—though not from age—and
the women spoke to him. They spoke to him in difficult
English at first, and he knew a little broken English, but
he couldn’t understand very much of it properly. The
other man with us couldn’t understand English at all,
whether broken or perfect. The red-headed woman who
was speaking to us was a good six feet high. She had a
shock of hair, and was a fine woman. She was a fishwife
and guessed that we followed the same trade, and she was
forcing her acquaintance on us. Before long I heard her say
to the grey-haired man:

‘Come along, Blashket man, won’t you have a drink?’

‘I woint nat, mam,’ says the poor, grey-haired man, for
he didn’t grasp what was happening very well, and in a
flash he turned to bolt, and, as he turned, she gripped him
by the back-piece of his vest and tore away that piece from
top to bottom. The red-haired woman followed us to the
threshold of our lodgings to return the back-piece of his
vest to the grey-haired man, and the two of us were short
of breath trying to keep up with our friend’s wild rush as
he fled from her.

We slept well that night, and when we saw the light of
day and had eaten something, we went out again. The
grey-haired man had no vest, but he bought a new one,


and a back-piece for the one that was torn. We all bought
novelties all over the city so that not a man of the boat’s
crew brought back to the Blasket a ha’penny of the price
of the small mackerel. When we had all our traps gathered
together, off we went on the homeward way.

When we got home we had to tell everything, and, as
always happens, there was a scandalmonger in our com-
pany, and he felt bound to bring up the tale of the vest.
He improved the tale for them, and he came near to setting
the grey-haired man and his wife by the ears; and the rest
of us didn’t get off with whole skins either. Whatever price
could be got for goods in Iveragh from that time on, the
women of the Island were anything but keen to let their
men go there to sell anything for some time to come. Idle
talk sometimes causes great scandal.

It was not till long after that that we paid our next visit
to Iveragh. A night of storm came, and the next morning
one of the big boats had been swept away. It was our boat
that had gone. There was a hue-and-cry all over the village.
This was a heavy loss to us, for she was still a fine, new
boat, and for some part of each year we used to make good
catches in her. And now she was gone without a trace!

One day I had gone into Dingle. It was a Saturday. In

’ those days foreign boats used to come overseas looking for
May mackerel along these coasts, and their habit was to
moor in the harbours from Saturday to Monday. They
were in the Dingle harbour that day.

I went into a house, and there I heard a boy from one of
these boats telling the man of the house that one of them
had found a fine boat adrift that morning near the Skelligs
completely undamaged, and that they had taken her in to
the quay at Valencia and left her in charge of the priest
of that island so that he could hand her over to her
owners,

‘Maybe it’s your boat,’ said the shopman to me.

‘Maybe,’ said I to him.

We described the boat to the youth, and he described
it to us, and we made out that it really was the Black Boar.

I told the host to serve the best drink in the house to the
foreigner who had brought me this good news. And the
foreigner burst out laughing.

‘Surely it isn’t the man who’s lost his little boat that
ought to stand a drink to us who still have our boat and
have done well this week! That drink is on me,’ said he,
and wouldn’t hear a word against it.

When I went out I met a man from Dunquin with his
horse and cart ready to go home, and I got a lift from him
for myself and all the stuff I’d collected in the town. That
was a kindness on his part, and I was very grateful to him
for it. I stayed with him in Dunquin that night, and on
Sunday morning the Island boats were out to Mass. I tell
you when they heard that the boat was safe and sound
across in Valencia they were surprised and delighted.

On Monday morning we went south with the other boat,
eight of us, so that both boats should have a crew of four
on the return journey. When we got across we made our
way to the quay in Valencia Island, and there the boat was
perfectly sound. One of the King’s men came up to us, a
coastguard, and put questions to us to find out if it was our
boat. We said that it was, and asked him if she was ready
for us to take away with us; if she was, we would take her
at once, for the afternoon was fine for the passage north,
and, if the sea should be at all rough against us, we had not
enough men to take the two big boats. He said that he had
no right over the boat, but was only looking after her; that
she had been entrusted to the parish priest of the island
and that we must see him.

The parish priest wasn’t at home at all, and since this
was the case, we had to take lodgings in Cahirsiveen that
night. We found the house in which we had been before.


The old couple in the house made us welcome. Believe me,
or take the tip of the ear off me, that we didn’t go strolling
much about the town after the lights were lit that night.

When we had made ourselves ship-shape in the morn-
ing, a drink was the first thing to warm our hearts; the
next thing was a meal, and we took things as lightly and
easily as though we were in the Blasket Harbour.

**Pon your souls and bodies!’ says the captain. ‘Is it
that you are without a care in the world on you? When
shall we have this old hulk of a boat in harbour in the
Island?’

Tt was a mischief-maker, no doubt, who gave him his
answer and said:

‘This is one of the days of our life, and maybe the last
day we shall spend in this town of Cahir.’

When we came to Valencia the parish priest was waiting
for us, instead of our having to wait for the priest. We
greeted one another, and he questioned us about the boat,
and then handed her over to us to take home.

We couldn’t be satisfied then without finding a bar to
drink deoch-a-dorish' in, and that was a long and lagging
drink. The mischief-maker was the first cause of it, but
another man stood a drink after him, and then another and
another, and, to make a long story short, we stayed there
till night.

There was Dingle Bay to be crossed, and we were not
strong enough for the two big boats unless we had a
following wind, and that we hadn’t got. For one that was
in a condition to do his job, there were two that weren’t. At
last we agreed to wait till the morning and the early part
of the day anyhow. The host made room for us, and that
suited us well. The next day was a feast day. There would
be Mass at ten o’clock, and we should have the long day
before us after that. In the morning when we had had some

* Stirrup-cup.

food we went back through the island, for the chapel is in
the middle of Valencia Island. We got there early, taking
notice of everything that came our way. Some of the
people there have large holdings—in the best part of the
island, you may be sure. These are the foreigners. The rest
have little land, and that in the worst part.

We got to the chapel like this, putting questions to a lad
from the quay who was in our company. It was an old
chapel, with four gables, and not very high or big. Two
public-houses faced it.

When the congregation was collected they were all very
neatly dressed, and though it was an island you would
have thought that they had been brought up in the centre
of the country. And as for clean, respectable clothes, those
were the sort they wore. When we went into the chapel,
the central part of it was open up to the rafters, while the
rest of it was covered with a loft on the inside of each gable.
Whether I said few or many prayers, they didn’t prevent
me from casting an eye on the congregation, and I didn’t
see a swarthy skin or a black-haired head among them in
the chapel or out.

We gave the inns the go-by when Mass was over and
started off back across the island; for we meant to go home
though the day was pretty rough and gusty by this. We
went into a farmer’s house and got some milk to drink
there. We said to one another then that we had best go
where we could get a sight of the sea to the north, and we
cast an eye over it to see what it was like, and whether it
was too wild for us to make a course across.

When we went to the top of a round-topped hill there
we came on the big slate quarry that is there on the flank
of the hill. It was a wonderful sight for us. Coming down
from the quarry we had a fine view of the place of that
nobleman, the Knight of Kerry. He was often called the
Knight of Glenleem, for his residence is here in Glenleem.


We had had no experience of places of this kind, and it is
little wonder that we marvelled at it.

At that time of day in Valencia Harbour there was the
greatest sight of masts any of us had ever seen. All these
masts were on big ships or little vessels, for fishing boats had
collected there from far and near that year after mackerel.
Plenty of money was being made, and the poor themselves
didn’t want for a pound. The upshot was that, by the time
we got to the quay, we had pretty well wasted the day
looking at this and that. That did us no harm anyhow,
for the day was settling. Though it had been very wild
in the morning, there wasn’t a breath of wind out of the
sky by this time.

We ran down to the boats so and set them afloat and
gathered all the traps that belonged to them into them. At
that moment the mischief-maker, who was always in our
company, spoke and said that poor men ought to quench
their thirst before venturing into the bay to the north.

Another man answered and said that maybe the crew
hadn’t much money in their pockets.

‘Sure it’s a poor pocket that hasn’t anything in it,’ says
the mischief-maker. ‘I’ll stand you a drink myself,’ says he.

There was nothing else to be done but to go with him.

We went. He called for a gallon of porter. When the
man who was standing the drinks looked round, there was
one of the eight who wasn’t in the house, and he sent a man
to find out where he was. He was in one of the boats lying
by the quay. As he hadn’t got a shilling of his own, he was
shy of going with the company, and the messenger was
hard put to it to fetch him along.

At last all our thirst was quenched, and we started for
the boat. We said farewell, with a blessing, to those who
were on the quay that fair and lovely evening of holyday.
We set the boats’ sterns to land and their prows to sea, as the
mighty heroes used to do in the old days, and started out

through the channel. The lamp was just lighted in the
lighthouse as we were leaving the harbour. Off went our
two boats racing together till we reached the landing-place
in the Western Island, as we call the Blasket. As the night
was short and fine, and we were in no haste or hurry, it
was day by the time we got to our houses.
18. An End to Boats and
Middlemen

OUR BOATS IN DINGLE SEIZED FOR RENT: THEY

ROT AS UNREDEEMED PLEDGES: A POUND A COW

AS RENT FOR THE FUTURE: THE ROUGH FIELD»
DEATH OF MY FATHER AND MOTHER

Asout three years after the boats had been brought from
Valencia we took them both with us to Dingle, full of
everything likely to bring in money—wool, pigs, sheep,
fish, and so on. They had a big cargo, and sixteen men to
work them. We had a fine following wind east through the
bay till we reached the quay and the landing-place in
Dingle. The boats were put in safety, the crew sold all
their goods, and then there was the night to spend in the
town.

If that was a merry night for us, it was followed by a
sorrowful noon on the morrow, for, when we went to the
boats there were strangers in charge of them who wouldn’t
let us touch them——police who had authority to keep them
from us. They had orders from the rent collectors, and, as
we were not paying the rent in any other way, there was
little fear that it would be paid now when we were cut off
from our boats, our road through the sea, and our
livelihood.

It was the talk of all Dingle—the Blasket Islanders
imprisoned in the town. A number of people came from
the countryside to see the wonder, and a friend or two
with a trifle of money in his pocket to help us to redeem
the boats.

The whole rent of the Island was demanded before there
was any chance of freeing the boats, though there were

many in the Island who had nothing to do with them.
Two friends of mine from the country came to me offering
money to redeem my share in the boats, but I refused it
with thanks, for I saw no sign that they intended to let
them go yet anyhow.

We wandered up and down the streets, and a kind
shopman here and there offered us money if we intended
to redeem the boats; but none of us would take it: we said
that if there was any idea of redeeming them, we would
come back to them. And we spent another night in Dingle.

Next morning we were in gloom and misery, without
any change or advance in our troubles any more than the
day before. We stayed there till midday. Then we were
at the end of our patience, and the sixteen of us set out
from the town, breathing rage and consigning all the
middlemen and landlords to the black devils. We reached
Dunquin, some of us getting lifts, but most of us going on
foot. We had to hire a cart to carry back whatever goods
we had bought. We had spent a little money on our
journey, but we were forced to put up with it and keep on
until we returned to the place we had left.

We were left with no big boats then, and ever since until
to-day, only canoes. The rent collectors were beside them-
selves, for, when the boats had been put up for sale, they
couldn’t find a purchaser to pay a pound for the lot, and
they had to put them into a field till the moths ate them,
and they never got sixpence or a penny for them. That
broke the courage of the bailiffs and the rent collectors
from that time on, as far as the Island went. Since they
didn’t get a thing out of the boats that time, it was long
before any rent at all was demanded of us; and the upshot
of the whole affair was that you wouldn’t find it hard to
reckon up all the rent we’ve paid from that day.

We had to take to the canoes then and do our best to fish
the sea with them by day and night—lobsters by day from


Mayday to August, and mackerel by night, every night
that c .me fine when the fish were there.

We spent a few years like this, with more strangers
coming for the fish every year till there were five companies
at last after them, and there was a demand for the mackerel,
too. So, if it was a cruel and toilsome job to come by
catches of this kind, those who were taken up with this
business never knew privation or hunger. If we had been
as careful of the pounds in those days as we have been for
some years past, it is my belief that poverty wouldn’t have
come upon us so soon.

Soon after this there came a change in the world, and
not in one way only. The middleman had to give up the
land, and shortly after a man came to the Blasket sent by
the Earl of Cork himself. At that time the rent was at the
rate of two pounds per cow—that is, eighty pounds on the
whole Island—and this man summoned the Islanders
together to come to some sort of agreement as to how much
they thought they could possibly pay—that was the sum of
his business with them.

After they had spent some time thinking it over, a rake
there spoke at last and said:

‘My soul from the devil! if I’d consider it worth my
while to put a spade in earth unless I paid at the rate of a
pound a cow for it!’

If there wasn’t laughter over the rascal’s speech, it isn’t
day yet; even the gentleman laughed. They understood
the poor fellow to mean that he would feel himselfin God’s
Heaven if he held his piece of land at the pound rate,
considering that his father before him paid five pounds a
cow, and often enough they had to pay more even than the
five pounds, for the scoundrels used to be confiscating
cattle every day from anybody who had them, for in those
days they didn’t give a rush for the law itself, and the poor
had no means of taking up a case against them.

Whatever rent there was on the land after this, there
was some improvement. We were done with bailiffs and
injustice from that out. When once your rent was paid, no
second demand could be made for it until the right time
came round again.

We passed the time like that for a good space, and the
Islanders were well satisfied with the arrangement, though
the rascal who suggested the rent of a pound a cow got a
jab or two now and again, as they thought that they could
have got it for ten shillings just as well. However, they
never felt the price of anything at that time, so long as a
dozen lobsters fetched ten shillings, and a hundred of
mackerel a pound; there was a plentiful supply and a
constant demand. I remember a tank boat coming from
England with three hundred pounds of yellow. gold on
board, paying a shilling a fish that day—and the three
hundred pounds wasn’t enough to pay for the fish.

People say that the wheel is always turning, and that’s
a true saying, for in the part of the world that I have known
it has turned many times; and if the world improved a bit
round the Blaskets at that time, and God gave us that
much good fortune, I fancy we didn’t take the care we
should have done of it, for ‘easy come, easy go’ is always
the way.

Looking round me in this year (1888) I found I had a
little field of rough land in the upper part of my holding,
and I determined to break it up, for it was very old land
and useless as it was, and in my enthusiasm I purposed to
break in half of it that year and the other half the year
after.

Often a man has made an unprofitable plan, though at
other times it doesn’t turn out like that. This plan of mine
wasn’t worth much, for it resulted in a great deal of labour
for me, and I gained little from all my work. I must set
my face to the strand to get weed for manure; I had an old


black ass, and he had to travel a mile and a half under
every load, every step of it uphill.

Well, often has a man taken on a job, and before he’d
had it long in hand he’s found that he’s had enough of it,
and certainly that was the way with me. Very soon I was
sick of it, more particularly as the old black ass was
letting me down.

In the end I set half of the little field with potatoes.
When I was planting them my father was in good trim;
he was seventy years of age, and all that was wrong with
him was that he was a bit bent. However, he used to pay a
visit to this field every day, though he was getting weaker
and slower every day.

Before long he began to give up his visits to the field
altogether, though he was keen enough about it at first.
One day, when I imagined he was in the field, I looked out
and I couldn’t see a sign of him there, and that struck me
as odd. I asked a lad who was going by for news of him,
and he said that he was in the house of Kate, his daughter,
and sure enough there I found him.

‘Father,’ I said to him, ‘wasn’t I thinking that it was in
the little field you were since you had your morning meal??

‘I don’t hanker after it much,’ said he.

‘But you had a great fancy for it at first.’

‘I had, but I don’t feel like that now. I shan’t see a
potato come up in that field.’

There are many things we don’t heed until it’s too late.
And after my father was buried I regretted that I hadn’t
questioned him and asked him whether he had seen or
heard anything in the field when he visited it. No doubt,
something of the kind happened to him, considering that
he dated his life’s end so accurately.

My father was in the grave before the potatoes showed
above the ground. That left more of the world’s trouble.on
poor Tomas; and that wasn’t the end of my troubles either.

Round about Mayday there were mackerel to be caught
that year, and we made a good penny out of them. I had
five pounds put by at the end of a single week. Then my
father died, and I had to take my five pounds and coffin
him with them. Coffins weren’t as dear in those days as
they are to-day. The whole funeral cost about ten pounds
then. It has often cost thirty pounds since then.

After I had gone through all this I had to wring more
work out of my bones, and after all my toil working the
little field there weren’t two sackfuls of potatoes in it; only
I got three crops of oats from it and the last crop was the
best of them.

I set about the other side of the little field the next year,
and I made a great deal more profit out of this half than
out of the other that I had broken up first, for I had more
experience of the nature of the soil, and I arranged my
manuring to suit it.

There were ten sacks in this half of the field, and oats,
too, for three years, for I paid more attention to it, as my
eyes had been opened by my experience of the other half.
Another thing, too, many a neighbour soul gave me his
blessing, for I often reached my hand out to them when
they wanted seed.

A short while after this my mother began to fail and to
bid this world farewell, being eighty-two years old now.
She had no cramp in hand or foot at that age, and she
stood as straight as ever she did in the days of her youth.
She was not ill long once she had been taken sick, and
maybe it was as well for her to be done with the world
then; and I had small chance to look after her then, the
affairs of the world were so thick upon me. One night she
was very bad and I had decided to stay up with her, when
who should come in to me but uncle Diarmid, and he told
us all to go to bed at once; he it was who would tend on the
sick woman till morning.


Before the dawn came he called out: ‘She’s in the next
world.’

I set about getting myself ready to face for Dingle to get
the furnishings for the funeral. The weather stayed fine till
my mother reached her family churchyard in Ventry—a
long journey by sea and land from the Blasket, and,
although there was a fine following of many horse-drawn
cars, it was on men’s shoulders that she went to her grave.

So ended the two who put the sound of the Gaelic
language in my ears the first day. The blessing of God be
with their souls!
19. Lhe Little Canoe

MY BROTHER BACK FROM AMERICA: FISHING FOR
LOBSTERS: THE SHIP WITH THE GENTLEFOLK >:
THE STRONG DRINK: LOBSTERS AT NIGHT: ‘THE
SHAMROCK’ + THE SEALS ON THE ROCK~ THE
DRIFTING BEAMS

Awuize after this my brother Pats came over from America
to me. I was amazed at his coming over this second time,
for his two sons were grown up by this; and I fancied they
were on the pig’s back since they were on the other side.
When I saw my brother after his return, anybody would
have conjectured from his ways that it was in the woods he
had spent his time in America. He was hardly clothed; he
had an ill appearance; there wasn’t a red farthing in his
pocket; and two of his friends in America paid for his
passage across with their own money. Though he hadn’t
had a day out of work all those long years he had spent
every penny of his pay on his two sons; he wouldn’t let
them go to work, and any sixpence that was left over when
he had paid the expenses of the three of them, it was his
way to go to a bar and drink it up—and I fancy that it
was little enough that he had to drink with.

I don’t mean to spend much of my story talking about
them, but will make a clean sweep of them and their
fortunes: how they dealt with the father who had worked
for them all those years, spending his sweat in the States
of America trying to make men of them, to bring them up
to man’s years—and succeeding. The sum of the whole
matter is that not a one of those two has ever asked after
him since.

I knew my brother’s mind and manners well enough
beforehand, and though that was so, what was I to do?


I couldn’t send the only brother I had adrift after he had
come back from America. The fact is it was as much as he
could do to keep in his right wits, and, ifit hadn’t been so,
he wouldn’t have had to depend on anybody, for he was
the best worker to be found wherever he went. But where
will you find a wise man without his weak side?

Well, just at this time there was fine fishing to be had
round the Blaskets—mackerel and lobsters—and a great
demand for them, and when I saw that Paddy was minded
to help me, I thought the best thing I could do was to
invent some way to put him to use.

The plan I fixed on was to take an old canoe that I had
and cut it down so that it would be easy for two to carry
it up and down, for most of the canoes at that time had
only a crew of two for the lobster fishing in the season.
We used to have a score of pots in the little canoe, and it
would have delighted your heart to watch us fighting the
sea with her, and I tell you that we did well at the fishing,
though we never went far from home. We used to work
round Beginish, and so we managed to get home for the
three meals of the day. Others of the canoes used to go
far afield, as far away as the Teeraght, Inishtooshkert,
Inish na Brdé, and Inishvickillaun—all the Lesser
Blaskets.

The crews that went far afield like this had to take
provisions with them every day and stay out from the
dark of morning till the dark of night, and they were pretty
tired by the day’s end. No doubt the lobsters were far
more plentiful in those islands than near home, though the
home-worker drew level with them, for he visited his pots
more often.

We sold many a pound’s worth to the vessels that plied
north and south through the Sound of the Great’ Blasket.
They would have their ‘speckled snowy sails’ set, and
often there wasn’t a breath of wind out of the sky. We often

had our dinner on board, and we used to give them crabs
and other small fish: they would give us tobacco and
other things, and a glass of whisky for me—Pats never
tasted a drop after he had left America, for he had bought
his sense.

One fine day there came to us through the Sound from
the south a small steamship towing another ship after her
that had only sails, and was painted every colour under
heaven. The sailing ship was black with people, every one
of them looking more of a gentleman than his fellows as
far as dress and ribbons went. The two ships were travel-
ling slowly so that they could look at our Blaskets in
comfort.

It happened that I was hauling up a pot near them at
this moment, and what should be in it but a blue lobster
and a crayfish, just as the two ships were passing by us on
their way north. I held up the crayfish in one hand and
the lobster in the other, and no sooner had I done that
than every soul in the ships on deck, man and woman,
was beckoning to us, and they stopped short on the surface
of the sea till we came up to them. Nobody was ever
welcomed like the two old fishermen. We had a dozen
lobsters and two dozen crabs and three dozen of other fish,
and the gentry didn’t worry about how we looked, or
our little canoe; all they thought about was to get fresh
fish from us. One of the crew lowered a bucket to take up
the lobsters, and when I looked at the bucket I fancied that
he wouldn’t have put a lobster in it for five pounds—it
was such a fine vessel! He lowered it again to take up the
crabs, and a third time for the other fish.

When he had collected all the contents of the little
canoe on deck, he lowered the bucket again without a
moment’s delay, and, upon my oath, I thought that it
was a hunk of bread that we had in the stern of the canoe
that he wanted this time. But it wasn’t as I thought, for,


when I caught it in my hand and looked at it, what was to
be seen in it was money. The man who lowered it to me
spoke in English and said that there was a shilling for
every fish I had sent up to him in the bucket. My gentle-
man drew the bucket up again, and before long I saw it
coming down to me again, heaped up and running over,
and the greatest lady of all on board was letting it down
this time, so I thought, and she was the finest woman for
manners and beauty that I ever saw. The bucket was
crammed with every kind of food and ‘kitchen’, and I
couldn’t put a name to half of them. When I had emptied
it in the stern of the boat, I doffed my cap and bowed to
the lady, thanking her.

Soon a man came to the waist of the ship and told me
to hand him the empty bottle we had in the boat. I did so,
and before long he sent it down full of clear water, and
asked me again whether we had another bottle in the boat.
We hadn’t. He left me again, and when he came back he
had a splendid bottle with him that would hold about six
glasses. He handed it down and told me to use a good deal
of water with a little of the contents of the other bottle.

We said farewell to one another with a blessing. By this
time we were a mile and a half from land. That wasn’t far,
for the day was fine. We had not parted with one another
for long when my ill fortune prompted me to try what was
in that bottle. The other man said that I’d better have
sense and move in to the land first before I tasted it, and
that I had plenty of time for it.

It was no good talking to me. I said that all I wanted to
do was to taste it to see what sort of drink it was. I thought
that, unless it was some special sort of poison, I should be
safe enough with it; but, as with everything else, a poor
sinner can’t do what is best for himself. It was the little
wooden cup that we used for the bailer that I took, and
I poured about a spoonful, I thought, out of the bottle.

When Pats saw how little I had poured out, he said:
‘Since you are at it, what’s the good of a trifle?’

“Try the river before you venture into the current,’ said
I, like a wise man. And that’s the last word he got out of
me for two hours after that. We’d gone about a mile of
the way by this, and there was another half-mile to go, and,
to cap all, there was a gust of wind blowing, working up to
a flurry, white with foam. That much I had seen before
I drank the stuff in the cup.

Down it went. When I had drunk it, I stood a moment
~-so Pats told me afterwards—and then fell flat in the
bottom of the canoe. The poor fellow thought I was dead,
and fancied that there must have been poison in the
bottle, and that the gentry had given it me by mistake.
The poor chap worked the very stuff and marrow out of
his bones struggling to make the land. Just after he had
got there, at his last gasp, to a sheltered pool inside a creek
in Beginish, that’s when I came out of my swoon, with no
hurt or harm.

“Maybe you'd better take another little drop of it!’ said
Pats to me.

I realized that it was disgust made him say that, and I
kept quiet. Indeed, I was ashamed enough when I saw
what a gale was blowing outside, and understood what a
hard time he had had of it trying to make the creek with
the little canoe, with me lying a dead weight in the bottom
of it.

The gale was still raging, with no sign of settling; but all
the same we had the shelter of the land now, and, to be
sure, we weren’t an unprovisioned boat at that moment.
Though we were by Beginish—and that wasn’t far from
home—we had no thought of leaving the creek where we
were,

After a while the gale went down a bit, so that Pats
said:


‘Perhaps we might manage to lift the pots? There’s a
lull in the wind by these rocks.’

I wasn’t very keen to do it, but he was a man who liked
to have attention paid to what he said, and when you
crossed him, he’d be no use for three days to come.

We set about doing what he proposed. Most of the work
fell on himself, for he was doing the rowing, while I was
lifting the pots. We'd only just lifted them when the gale
blew the crests clean off the waves. We managed to make
the creek again. We got a dozen lobsters out of the pots.

It was midnight by the time we reached the Island that
night, and our people were in a terrible state of mind,
going round to get help to go and look for us, for they
were sure we were drowned.

That was a great year for fish. At every shift of the pots
you would get a dozen lobsters, and that meant a dozen
shillings: those twelve shillings bought a half-sack of flour,
and eight shillings a half-sack of meal, and so with every-
thing else. A poor man could live easily enough in those
days.

After those ships had gone from me there came an
exceptionally fine month, without a ripple on the sea
anywhere, and that was the sort of weather that was best
for catching the fish that were going; and, what was even
better, there was a great call for any fish you had. Pats and
I were doing very well with the little canoe, for we had
all the range we wanted, and there was nobody to interfere
with us. The lobsters come into the pots best in the late
evening. One evening we were very late, and they were
going in thick and fast.

‘It’s a great shame for anyone to go home on a calm,
peaceful night that isn’t long or chilly,’ says Pats to me,
‘when there’s gold to be got in the pots. If the folk of this
place had been where I was for a while, they’d have a bit
more knowledge.’
SCHOOLCHILDREN

APPROACHING THE ISLAND FROM THE MAINLAND


‘Before we get home now it'll be day again,’ says he.
‘Let’s leave the pots a bit and there’ll be as much again
in them as we've got out of them already, and, if that’s so,
isn’t it a pity to leave them there.’

Now, he was the kind of man that, if you didn’t give
him his head, wouldn’t go with you to-morrow, however
much you needed him; and so, though I wasn’t too pleased
with the idea, I had to fall in with him, or I should have
had to work the little canoe alone the next day.

“Come along,’ says he, ‘we’ve given them time enough;
we'll have a look at them.’

So we did. When we drew up the first pot, you never
heard such a row as was going on in it.

‘I fancy there’s a conger in it,” says Pats, who was at the
oars in the bow.

‘No, I don’t think so.’

I thrust my hand down into the pot and drew out a
fine lobster, and another one after him.

‘Are there two in it?’ says the man in the prow.

‘There are. Two fine ones, too,’ said I to him.

‘That’s two shillings. O, God of the Miracles! how I
should have had to sweat in America to make two
shillings, and all I have to do here is to pull up a pot
through two fathoms of water!’

When we'd finished drawing the pots, there were a
dozen splendid lobsters in them.

‘Mary Virgin! how many easy shillings there are in the
sea!’ says he. ‘When you think of other places where you
have to sweat blood to make a shilling! *Pon my soul and
body, there are people in America who, if they could come
by money as easily as this, would never slumber or sleep.
They'd be pulling up all the time.’

I believed him well enough so far as that went, though
he blethered a lot generally, and I often had some
difficulty in believing him. I wasn’t so ignorant that I


couldn’t understand how it was in countries overseas—hard
work, and the ganger spying on you, two of them some-
times,

We waited about an hour when I saw him putting out
his oars again.

‘It looks as though we were going to sleep altogether.
Since we are spending the night out, we may as well have
something for it,’ says he, throwing into the sea one of the
pot ropes in the bow which anchored the canoe while we
were at rest.

As I’ve said already, I had to act as his servant instead
of being the master, or we'd never have got anything done.
We started to work again, and when we'd finished with
the pots, we had another dozen. We anchored again.

‘No wonder there are so many poor wretches on the
coasts of Ireland,’ says Pats, ‘as indeed there are, and may
there be more of them! For they deserve to be—such a
crowd of lazy devils, snoring away at this time on a fine
calm night, when there’s gold and silver to be made for a
little trouble and sweat.’

You might think there was something in what he said.
Still you have to consider that a poor sinner can’t keep at it
night and day alike.

We stopped for a bit. I fancy that I dropped off into
a doze. He said I did, and that I had a good bout of sleep.

‘I think the grey glimmer of dawn is coming and that
we'd best take another turn out of the pots, and then we'll
get home, and not a soul will know how we’ve spent the
night,’ says Pats, throwing off the rope and putting out
his oars.

I promise you I wasn’t so lively by this time—the morn-
ing was beginning to peer then. I had an empty belly and
was all numb and chill, whatever was the case with the
man in the prow. But I pulled myself together, since I had
to, and by the time we had the pots drawn, I was broad

awake, and we had a dozen more lobsters, and two on the
top of that.

When we turned our faces home, what should we see
but a vessel coming to anchor, and it was plain that it was
a stranger. She was in the Sound in front of us, and it
wouldn’t take us out of our way to go and have a word
with her. When we came alongside we saw her name—
The Shamrock. She had a tank for lobsters inside her, and
it was lobsters she was after. They asked us how many
lobsters we had, and how much we wanted for them. We
told the captain that we hadn’t much on board, but that
we had as much again in a store pot over there. More-
over, we wouldn’t ask more of him than we would off any
other ship.

‘Off with you, then, and bring all you have in the pot,’
says he. We went, and the pot wasn’t too far away. We
came back to her with six dozen. He counted them one
by one and handed three gold sovereigns to us. That was
the catch of one day and one night. I told the captain so
and that we had been up all night. We were pretty tired,
but all the same our night was well paid. He told us at
once to come on board. We begged his pardon, saying
that we weren’t far from home now. He wouldn’t accept
that, but made us come on board. ‘We’ve got a meal ready
here, and eat your fill,’ says he.

We had to accept his invitation. We made a good meal.
I was rather shy, being so smudgy and dirty in a place like
that, but the other chap never gave it a thought; all he
wanted was to fill his belly; he’d left all the shyness and
nervousness of his early days in foreign lands, and he told
me, too, that if ’'d been away from home a bit, I wouldn’t
have cared what sort of a place I got food to eat in.

When I came on deck the captain was strolling up and
down, and he began to question us about the lobsters, and
he asked whether there were more of them about the


Island. We told him how things were. In a while we left
him and bade farewell. When we reached the harbour,
some of the others were just leaving it, and another lot
were still in bed.

When we had landed the canoe, Pats said:

‘We'd better take a bottle of milk and a dozen eggs out
to the ship. We shan’t be long.’

I liked to hear him speak in this generous style; though
often enough he said things that didn’t please me. Off I
went along the Island, and he stayed where he was until
I came back with two dozen eggs and a bottle of milk. We
went out again to the little ship. I handed up the bottle
and the box of eggs. One of the crew caught hold of them at
once and took them on board—for they’ve no way of
getting eggs and milk while they are ploughing the sea.
When the box came back, it was full to the brim—
biscuits, tobacco, a joint of meat—and to top all, when I
searched the box afterwards, what should I find there but
half a pint of whisky. We rowed in and went home and
went to bed till dinner-time—a new thing for us to do.

After our dinner we went out again and began to pull
up the pots and set them in trim ready for twilight, for
that’s the time when the lobsters go into the pots most-—
they don’t like the middle of the day; it’s too bright. As
the sun was sinking into the sea, we fell to pulling them up
again, and they were well filled. We made out then that
the night is the best time for catching them. And from that
time on we used to spend every fine night out on the sea,
so that we made first-rate catches, and nobody knew.

Far on in the autumn, one fine night that we were
anchored with a lobster pot rope, we heard a singing, soft
and long and sweet, in the deep middle of the night, to the
northward of us on some rocks that lay about half a mile
from us. My heart leapt in me, and I felt very odd.

‘Do you hear it?’ said I to the other man.

‘I hear it well enough,’ said he.

‘Let’s be off home,’ said I.

“Yerra, you poor wretch, they’re only seals,’ said he.

‘They can’t be seals, for they have a human voice!’

“Yes, they are indeed, and anyone can tell that you’ve
never heard one of them before. It’s their way to carry
on like a human being when some more of them come
ashore to join the rest, and there’s a crowd of them high
and dry on those rocks to the west now.’

I partly believed him, and I knew that these people that
travel to the lands across the sea don’t worry themselves
over anything, dead or alive. And at that thought I had
to give in.

Before long I heard it again, long and soft and sweet,
and it sounded to me like ‘Eamonn Magaine’, just as it
might come from human lips; and all I could do was to
keep my feelings down. As for the other fellow, he tuned
up a song himself. They were singing in the west and he in
the east. I fancy he did it to put heart in me.

Well, we took a shift out of the pots, and there was a
good dozen lobsters in them.

‘Have you got a dozen?’ says he.

‘I have exactly, neither less nor more.’

‘Isn’t it the devil’s own pity you didn’t fly off home at
the crooning of the seals. You'd be badly left in the
countries across the sea.’

No doubt he was right enough as far as that went,
though at other times he was often pretty far out. He went
on till he came to anchor on the same rope again, and, to
top all, this was in the place where the seals could be
heard most clearly.

While we were settling down there wasn’t a whistle or
a cry from anything; but before long they raised their
voices in chorus, so that they could be heard everywhere
around.


‘I wonder what sets them raving like this now and
again,’ said I to the other chap, ‘while they keep quiet at
other times.’

‘Every time a seal comes to them from the sea, that’s
when they go on like this. Another has just come ashore,
and they were asleep till that happened.’

By this time they were singing so that none ever heard
at market or fair so many songs in concert together, and
the sound of the one song weaving in and out of the other.
I cleaned him out of all he had to say about the seals, for
he had a great deal of knowledge of things, far more than
I who had never left the corner of the hearth.

‘Wait till the day dawns—and I fancy it’s not far off
now—and you'll see something: all the seals high and dry
on those rocks to the west,’ said he.

‘But I’ve often seen one of them by himself ashore on
a rock,’ said I.

‘That wouldn’t be all you’d have seen of them if it had
been a habit of yours to be abroad in the night. You’ll pay
no attention to them the next night you hear them, my lad.’

I understood him very well by the time he’d got through
with this last sentence, hinting, as it were, that I shouldn’t
fail to be eager to come the very next night! In a little
while he said that the dapple of day was beginning to show
in the east and we had just as well be shifting the pots again.

‘Wait till there is more light in the day, and then we shall
have less trouble looking for them from place to place.’

The upshot of it all was that it was bright enough by the
time we moved, and at that very moment the singers went
completely crazy, every last one of them tuning up in
chorus.

‘It won’t be long till those lads over there will be leaving
the rocks,’ says Pats.

Soon the full light of day was come and we could see the
seals in crowds on the ridge of the rock, some of them with

their heads in the air, another one snapping at his fellows
on this side and on that, and, far above them all, a huge
big chap lying without a stir on the rock. The other man
said to me that this fellow was still asleep, and that, when
he should wake, then the hurly-burly would begin. You
would have thought to listen to him that he’d spent his
life among them, he was so much better at explaining
them than I was.

We stayed anchored to our pot till nearly every one of
them had taken to the water, and they wasted that much
of the morning’s work for us. At last the big fellow woke up
out of his shumber, and when he lifted his head you could
hear the savage scream he let out of him ringing all round.
He was the foreman of the whole gang, big and little.
Before long he started down.

He was a bull, as huge a bull as was ever on dry land.
He shoved his snout under the seal next to him and flung
him into the air as high as a boat’s mast, and he never
stayed in his flight till he came down out in the sea. Then
began the fight at the fair when the rest of them saw that.
They hurried to the water at their best speed, and, if any
seal went too slow, when this chap came up with him, he
put his snout under him and lifted him into the sky ever
and always till he’d got them into the water, the whole
crowd that had been high and dry on the rock, and there
were a lot of them.

The big fellow stayed a while after them on the rock to
take breath and to see if he had the whole herd together.
Then he, too, plunged into the sea, and the two of us
agreed that the wave he raised where he struck the water
would have sunk a small ship. All the time this hurly-burly
was going on they made neither whistle nor cry, believe me.

We should have had all our pots lifted and safe well
enough while this row was going on, and I expected that
the other chap wouldn’t wait so long, but he did: I fancy


that the tricks they were playing gave him just as odd a
feeling as they gave me. We pulled up the pots quickly
enough after this, for they were easily seen since there
wasn’t much water above them. We had made a fair
catch by morning, a good three dozen. I tell you that, even
though our canoe was a little one, the catch was big. We
spent the whole season like this every fine night. Not much
goes into the pots by day or night when the sea is troubled.
The lobster likes to have the sea calm and quiet when he
peers about him.

One morning we were ready to come home and there
was a little breath of wind blowing from the west, and
when we started there were some spars of drift timber to be
seen. We picked them up. There were some more to be
got in other places. We soon had the canoe full, and some
more were still floating on the tide. We had to turn in to
Beginish and clear the boat and push out once more. The
driftwood was coming in masses round a point where there
was a swirl of tide. There were white planks, absolutely
new, afloat. We had to untie a rope from a pot and bind
together a dozen planks with it and tow them in our wake
and row back to where we had the rest and land them. We
took sixteen of them that turn, and hoped to get more while
that tide was running. The only thing that was troubling
me now was hunger. It was heavy work after a night out,
and the toil of getting the planks together was great, but
we were determined to carry on so long as there was a
piece adrift. As for the Yank, he never felt tired or hungry.

I let him know that I was getting hungry, and high
time, too. I wanted to see what he would say, making trial
of him, as it were.

‘Yerra, my lad! surely you remember the old saying,
“Take the fish while you can get him”, or do you think
that there'll be driftwood to be got any time you like?’
says Pats.

I had expected that that would be the answer I should
get, for I knew that he was right and that stuff of this kind
isn’t going all the time. We never stopped so long as the
tide that was collecting the driftwood for us held. Our
hunger passed from us as the time for taking food went
by. A man grows gradually weaker from that time on,
and so it was with us.

Later on in the day we saw first one boat and then
another, gathering the driftwood like ourselves on this
side and on that. By this time the two of us had saved
about three-score white planks with the little canoe in
Beginish. The poor lout of a Yank worked hard that day.
Often enough we’d be a long way from the shore by the
time I had a dozen planks tied up, and it was he who’d
land them without any help from me.

We were all right, but then what about our people at
home-—-we had left home just after dinner the day before,
and now it was dinner-time on the next day and we hadn’t
returned—all they could think was that we were lost.

Any canoes that were about the houses at this time—and
few they were, for they were in the little islands busied
about their pots—the few that were not, were in quest of
the driftwood by this time. And so there wasn’t an oar or
a canoe in the creek to go to look for us.

When we were weary and worn and the tide had turned
and the timber was growing scarce, we set our face home-
wards; and I tell you, dear reader, if there had been a puff
of wind against us, we should never have made it.

The talk of the village was the quantity of timber that
the two of us, with our little canoe, had collected in
Beginish, and for many days after that we found planks and
fragments and pieces of timber. We sold about half of the
Beginish stuff there, and the other half we had to bring
home with us, for not a bit of saved timber could ever be
left without being stolen.
20. The Troubles of Life

DEATH OF MY CHILDREN: THE DAUGHTER OF
THE WOMAN OF THE INISH DIES: THE BRASS
BOLTS + MY SON AND EILEEN NICHOLLS DROWNED:
DYARMID’S SON DIES

In the early part of the year after the salving of the drift-
wood—and I believe we made a dozen pounds out of it,
not to speak of any lobsters—we were doing very well, but,
‘the horse doesn’t always keep up its pace’.

At the time when the young birds come and are begin-
ning to mature, the lads used to go after them. My eldest
boy and the King’s son planned to go to a place where they
were likely to get a young gulli—for one of those would
often live among the chickens ina house for a year and more.

The two went together after the nests to bring a pair or
so of the birds home with them. They were in a bad place,
and, as my boy was laying hold of the young gull, it flew
up and he fell down the cliff, out on the sea, God save the
hearers! He remained afloat on the surface for a long time
until a canoe going after lobsters came up and took him
aboard.

His grandfather (his mother’s father) was in the canoe
that took him in. We had only one comfort—there was no
wound or blemish anywhere on his body, though it was
a steep fall from the cliff. We must endure it and be con-
tent! It was a great solace to me that he could be
brought ashore and not left to the mercy of the sea. This
was the first beginning, and an ill one it was, God help us!

This happened about the year 1890, just when the boy
was developing and beginning to lend a hand. Well, those
that pass cannot feed those that remain, and we, too, had
to put out our oars again and drive on.

That year did not prove as good as the year before; and
we didn’t take as many lobsters in the night either,
because of it, for the weather was never settled, and there
was a constant swell round the rocks—a thing that this
kind of fish dislikes. But it happened this year, neverthe-
less, that fish for curing came well inshore, and the sea was
full of them. They were pollock—a large, coarse fish, very
troublesome to get in over the boat’s gunwale; they were
caught with the line, a bit of mackerel for a bait, and a big
hook.

We went after them one day with trappings of this kind,
and we were so eager to catch them that we had to leave
the fishing ground early, for we had the little canoe full
and the sea was rough and disturbed; and when we came
to the creek, many a man marvelled at what our little
canoe had brought us.

We spent part of the year engaged with the fish for
curing until we had filled every vessel we had in the house,
and by then we had got three hundred pollock salted.
There was always a great demand for them among the
country people about Christmas for the festival.

I brought fifteen pounds with me from Dingle for my
pollock; many of my relations got a couple of them as well,
and. there were plenty left at home for my own use.

A while after that the daughter of Big Daly, the herd
of Inishvickillaun, came home from America. That was
the girl whom my uncle, Diarmid the rake, used to be
matching with me in the days of my youth, She spent a
few years across the water, but her health failed—as is the
case with so many others. After her return she got no
better, but fell into a decline, though she had come to the
healthiest island in Ireland.

She died at last, there on the island, during the fishing
season. There were fishermen from Iveragh with them in
the island at that time, and, when the news of her death


came, everybody who could did his best to get to the rock
to be at the wake.

They were the best and the most hospitable people that
ever lived on a rock of the kind, and for that reason every-
body tried to get to them in their time of trouble, and
there was a great concourse of people collected there that
night. Canoes were coming to the island until ten o’clock
at night, and a great number of others made the passage
to the west across the bay in the morning, for it was a
lovely day and the sea was fine and calm. It was the finest
day for a funeral I ever saw, and the hottest. The coffin
was put into the Iveragh boat, and there was a crew of
three good men in her. When they were ready, they turned
their backs to the rock and started to make haste east across
the bay. When the funeral reached the harbour of the
island, more canoes were waiting for us. We had still to go
three miles of sea or more. When I threw my eye over
them I thought I had never seen so many canoes together.
There were eighteen of them. I never saw, nor have I seen
to this day, so many boats in a sea funeral. Sixteen or
fourteen is the most I have seen since. May God be com-
forting to the souls of all those whom I must needs bring
back to memory; and may He give no ill place to any one
of them.

Though the man in the Inish had a houseful of children
then, there are only three of them in my neighbourhood
now; the rest of them are in America, scattered east and
west as with so many others.

The world went on like this from year to year, and I was
still living in my old hovel of a house. The thought came
to me to leave it and make a shift to build another little
shelter, and not to have the hens clucking over my head
any longer. Though often enough we found a nest of eggs
up there in a day of need, yet all the same the drip used to
come through often in their wake. A kind of house was

coming into use at that time which had a timber roof on
it—felt, and strips, smeared with tar, over that. They
were as slippery as a bottle, and when a hen wanted to go
up after her fashion to lay eggs she would fall down again
into the yard, and would never try it again.

When a thing once comes into a man’s mind, I fancy it
has a way of sticking there, and that was my case in this
matter of a house. I knew that I shouldn’t get any help
towards it, only that I had a sort of convenience in my old
house being there for me, so that I could take my time over
it. I didn’t move farther than the breadth of a street, for
T had the stones all round me, and I realized that it’s easy
baking next the meal, and that it was a great thing for me
that the materials were all about me. I set to work at once
designing the house, and when I had settled its length and
breadth I felt as though I should have a palace when I got
it up—well roofed with timber and felt and tar. I kept on
adding a bit to it when I got the chance, and piece by
piece it soon began to have the look of a house; and before
long the body of the house had risen, and all I had to do
was to put together the two gables, and they were soon
narrowing in, one row of stones after another.

Well, I never had an idle moment for a whole quarter,
and then I had set the ‘crow stone’—that is, the last stone
placed on the summit of the gable. I’d finished the job
without anybody handing me a stone or a bit of mortar!

It was in the depth of winter that I set about this business
of the house: for I shouldn’t have had any chance of doing
it in the busy fishing season—the time when I placed the
last stone, as I’ve just said. Work was beginning about mid-
March: there was the land to dig, and the weed for manure
to fetch in the boats or from the beaches, and that was the
time when people used to visit the seal caves.

One of those mornings—a fine, soft, lovely morning—
there was a knock on my door before day-break, and, as I


was only sleeping lightly, I sprang up at a bound and
opened the door, and who should be outside but Diarmid.

‘Dress yourself,’ said he. “The day is calm. We’ll go west
to the islands. Who knows what may be lying in a seal cave
or in a creek? Have you a bite of bread cooked?’

‘I’ve got bread enough,’ said I, ‘only I had no idea of
going back to the islands. I fancy it would be a wasted
journey so early in the year.’

‘Yerra, we'll get something—a string of rabbits, or,
perhaps, something better than that. How do you know
we mightn’t meet with a fine young seal? Take a good
hunk of bread that'll do for the two of us.’

‘Yerra, what an idle lump of a wife you’ve got! said
I to him, ‘I suppose she’s saving meal.’

‘Devil a bit! only she’s too lazy and doesn’t care who’s
hungry,’ says he. ‘She’s a fine, easy woman, and she
never had much sense.’

I put up a good slice of bread, and we went our way
together out of the door. The rest of the crew had come.
We launched the boat on the water, and off we went. We
never stopped till we got to Inish na Bré, where there was
a famous seal cave. It was a very rare thing not to find aseal
there. We said to one another that we had best search it.

In a moment there were four of us in the cave, for we
were keen to leave the boat. We were moving up the cave,
and one of the men started peering into a pool there.

‘I wonder what those things in the bottom of this pool
are?’ says he.

One man after another took a look, and we saw that the
hole was full of them.

One of the men in the boat was a great swimmer, and he
came and looked down.

*Yerra, you devils!’ said he, ‘they’re bolts of copper and
brass. Don’t you know that a hulk of a ship was wrecked
here a bit ago and it was full of bolts of this kind?’

No sooner had he finished that much talk than he cast
off every stitch of clothes and plunged his head under the
water.

There was little more than a man’s depth in the pool,
and he hadn’t been under long when he came to the
surface again with a bolt of copper four feet long.

“By your shining soul!’ says he, ‘are you depending on
me to bring up all that’s here? Put a rope round one or two
others, and you’d better look sharp before the tide comes,
for it’s hard to see them when there’s any disturbance in
the hole.’

That was what should be done; but where were the two
to go under water? That was the problem. There were
some of them who’d never been in the sea, and others of us
who could swim well enough, but we hadn’t the habit of
going under.

Diarmid rushed across the beach to me. ‘Aren’t you a
marvellous swimmer at other times, and often enough
without anything to show for it?’ said he. ‘Come over here
to me and loop this rope round you and fetch up one of
those golden hurleys for us. Don’t let’s have to depend on
one only, or on two for that matter.’

Well, even though I didn’t like the look of things much,
I didn’t want to bring that lunatic on top of me, and so I
did what he said. I threw off my duds and in I went to the
bottom of the pool. The rake was very upset when he saw
that I hadn’t put the rope round me, as he had said. He
thought that I was in a bit of a rage. But it wasn’t so, for
T stood in no need of a rope at all. All I had to do was to
thrust myself to the surface when I wanted, for I was a
good swimmer.

When I went down I hit upon a bolt with my foot, and
T looked about me to see if I could find another one so that
the rake would be surprised when he saw me coming with
two of them, for the other chap only brought them up one


at a time, and very set up with himself he was at getting
that much.

Well, I searched about a lot, and before long I saw the
second one and shifted it easily. One of them was under
my oxter and the other in one hand, while the other hand
was working for me. I put my feet in position and shot up
lightly to the surface, but, even so, the weight of the bolts
was dragging me down again, for it chanced that I had come
to the surface in the very middle of the pool. But the rake
played his part well. He flung the rope, and I caught it in
my unemployed hand. When Diarmid saw me coming
with the two bolts, then he began lilting. And he had no
pity for me since I’d come through alive with something in
my hands, for he was a man always keen on making a catch.

“Good for you! You may be slow, but you come heavy
laden,’ says he to me. ‘Down with you again.’

Another man was standing on the brink of the pool.
Maurice Ban they used to call him. He was a broad, strong
man, and he’d never swum a stroke. He didn’t like to see
us going into the pool while he was looking on. He said to
Diarmid:

“Tie the end of the rope to my body and I’ll go down and
bring an armful of those up with me, since there’s such a

Jot of them.’

‘Yerra, your soul to the swarthy devil!’ says Diarmid,
“you must be going out of your senses. One might as well
send a bag of salt down as you. Even the swimmers have
nothing but the breath left in them when they come up!’

Maurice turned to the other man to tie the rope round
him, when he saw Diarmid snarling at him; and that man
was a brother of Diarmid’s named Liam, who didn’t give
a curse whether Maurice came out of the hole dead or
alive.

Liam tied the rope round Maurice, and down he went,
and when he struck the bottom all he did was to pull at

the rope again until he came to the surface without waiting
for Liam to pull it up. It was well he did so, for Liam
would have given him plenty of time to drown down
there.

Before the water began to flood the hole the pair of us
had twenty-one bolts, a fine heap of them, both of brass
and copper; and it’s long before Diarmid would have
tired of dragging them out to the boat.

When we had everything ship-shape we began to chew
our bread and gulp it down—we hadn’t much to say till
that was done—with nothing in the world to eat with it
for sauce, only now and again a man would stretch out his
hand and scoop up a handful of the salt water and send it
down to clear his throat.

While we were fiddling about like this, just ready to
start for home, Liam gave a look and saw a trawler making
for Inishvickillaun.

‘Something’s bringing them to that place to-day,’ said
Diarmid.

When she came near the strand of the Inish she let go
her anchor as though she meant to make a stay there.

“Well,” says Diarmid, ‘out with your oars and let’s see
what has brought her, and then we’ll be off home in God’s
name.’

We made our way across, for the two rocks are close to
one another, and before long we were with them. She was
full of people. The chief part of their business was to have
a day’s fun on the islands.

We had the bolts hidden in the boat so that nobody
could see them, but in the end we said to one another that
it would be a good idea to show them one of them to see
what they would have to say about it. When a gentleman
on board saw the brass spar, he wondered where we had
come upon it, and asked us at once how much we wanted
for it. It was a very long time before he got any answer, for


nobody in the boat had any proper notion of it. At last the
captain of the vessel spoke and said:

“This is a man who buys this kind of thing, and he
would like you to sell it to him.’

Then we made out that he would buy all we had of
them. In the end, to make a long story short, we sold the
whole lot to him for sixteen pounds.

We had to go on board the trawler and take food and
drink in her—and there was plenty of it to be had, and
methinks the place to find plenty and to spare is where the
gentry are, At last we said farewell to them.

As we were coming up to the other rock—that is, Inish
na Bré—rabbits could be seen dancing on every blade of
grass in it. They had the hot weather and the sun and
pleasantness on the island to make them do it.

Suddenly, when we were just under the rock, Diarmid
spoke. He was our captain. He jumped up now and said:
‘It’s a lovely, quiet evening, and we haven’t a thing to do
but go home. We’ve two good dogs in the boat and a couple
of stout spades. Let’s pay a visit to the rock and we'll have
half a dozen rabbits apiece.’

For one man that fancied what he had to say there were
two that didn’t, but, all the same, every one of them liked
hunting. The boat stopped at the landing-place, and out
we went—two of us east and the other two west. It was
late in the evening before we met one another again on the
edge of the landing-place. The rake Diarmid wasn’t the
worst off for game. He had as much as any other two, only
he had a fine dog of his own; besides, there wasn’t a weak
place in him or in the dog.

When we had all come to the boat and put the game
together, we had eight dozen rabbits—a dozen apiece.
The oldest men in the boat said that it was the best sport
they ever remembered in the islands in so short a time.
There was a smell of wind blowing fair for home.

As few people can keep a secret, it got abroad, from one
of us, too, where we had spent the day, and what we had
found, and all about the gentry who bought the brass: and,
since the secret had got out, we had seen our last of the
metals. Before we got together on the morrow the boats of
the village were gone. But not many pounds were made
out of it ever after. The two pounds I got from this were
the first two pounds I paid for the roofing of the new
house. Goods were cheap in those days, and the things
I wanted for the new house didn’t cost me very much. I
had by me a lot of the things I needed for it, and it was a
little house, although when I was designing it I fancied it
was a palace; anyhow it was like a palace compared with
the hovel I had. The hovel had one good point—that it
gave me time to finish the new house without neglecting
any of my other work; and there was another thing, too—
there wasn’t a thing in it that I had to transfer to the new
house. I was at it from day to day, and from time to time,
till ’'d made a complete job of it. When I’d finished it, who
should come by but Diarmid. He stopped to look for a bit,
and then he said:

‘Mary Mother! how did you put it together so quickly
without help from a living soul? Wisha! blessing on your
arms! My soul from the devil! but no hen will ever lay
an egg on its roof, or, if she does go up, over the cliff she’ll
go!

The house stayed like that, all built ready, some time
before we went into it. There weren’t many of the felt-
roofed houses in the Island in those days, and now there
hasn’t been a house there for a long time without its
covering of felt—all except those that are slated. We went
to live in the new house about the year 1899, at the begin-
ning of spring. Our chief reason for moving in so early was
that manure was scarce that year, and there was as much
manure in the old house as would have done for half the


potatoes in the Island: there was nothing in it but soot and
manure. Besides, Diarmid was worrying me every day. All
he had planted were in very bad trim, for he was a poor
fellow, all alone, and he'd calls to attend to everywhere.
Too many calls often mean that things are clumsily done,
and most of them show little profit. I used to be sorry for
him, since the first wife he had was dead, and she had
been a good one, while the wife he got next was neither
handy nor tidy. Another reason I had for being fond ofhim
—he would give us the very marrow of his bones when his
help was needed.

So soon as Diarmid saw the fire and its smoke in the
new house, in he came to me and put in a claim for the
soot.

‘For God’s bright sake, don’t let anybody else but me
have it,’ says he.

He was very keen on the look-out for something, but
he would have been just as keen to give it away if he
had it.

‘I won’t give your share of it to anybody else, have no
fear,’ says I to him. ‘Have you got much to do to-day?’

‘Holy Mary! wisha,’ says he, standing between the two
door jambs, ‘I’ve nothing much on hand. Why do you
ask? Do you need me at all?’

‘Well, up you go on the roof of the old house and be
clearing the manure for yourself.’

Up he went with a good will.

We had been some time in the new house, getting on
very well, and thoroughly comfortable in it. A fine, clean
house, without dust or smoke it was. We hadn’t been
living long in it when whooping-cough, and measles with
it, came our way. Three months I spent sitting up with
those of my children who took them worst, and I got
nothing for the time I spent, only the two best of chem were
carried off. That was another discouragement for us, God

help us, and be sure that trouble went against us for a long
time. However things went with me, I fancy the sorrow of
it never left the mother for good or ili, and from that time
forth she began to fail, for she was not to live long, and
never lasted to be old.

Well, after all this anguish, I was trying to pull myself
together. It was imprinted on my mind that there was no
cure for these things but to meet them with endurance as
best I could, and I kept trying to get through a while more
of life—one year good and two that turned out ill.

A few years later a lady from the capital of Ireland came
to this Island on her holidays. Eileen Nicholls was her
name; and she hadn’t been here long when she made a
friend of a girl, and the one she chose was a daughter of
mine. The two of them spent a part of every day together.
One day they would be on the hill, another about the
strand and the sea; and when the weather was soft and
warm they used to go swimming. One day, when they
were bathing, a strong spring tide was running, and when
they thought it time to swim in to land they found them-
selves drifting away from it until they were exhausted. It
chanced that one of my sons was digging potatoes in the
garden near the house—this was in the beginning of
harvest—a vigorous lad, and a good swimmer. He was
eighteen years old. He saw the two girls swimming, and
saw who they were at once, and that they wouldn’t be able
to get ashore.

He threw his spade away and took the shortest cuts down
the cliff and the beach until he came to the strand. He
didn’t take off a thing, his boots or anything else, for they
weren’t too far out, and when he came down to the water he
saw the lady sinking. Out he went and spoke to his sister.
He told her to keep herself afloat on the surface for a while;
that as the lady was drowning, he would go to her assis-
tance first. He went, and he and the lady were drowned


together. Another man brought in the sister, who was at
her last breath. The boats took up the other two just as
Pats and I were returning as usual from our fishing. That
was the sight that awaited us.

Well, I had to face this trouble, too, and go through it.
It was the biggest funeral Dunquin had ever known. They
were carried together until they parted, going, each one
of them, to their family burying place. The lady’s family
were very kind to me for years afterwards. They both came,
the father and the mother, to see me in Dunquin and had
me pointed out to them. I hope they did not think that
I was angry with them because my son had died for their
daughter. I was never so foolish as that. If it was for her he
died, it could not be helped. It was God’s will.

I think that if it hadn’t been for my uncle Diarmid, I
should never have recovered from this trouble at all. I had
God’s help, too, for the daughter who had been in the sea
was never expected at first to come round either, since she
was still at her last breath. I felt that, if I could be assured
that even she would recover, things would not be so bad
with me. Diarmid used to come in every day and night,
making little of our despondent talk, reminding us of
troubles far worse than ours—a ship lost at sea with
hundreds on board; a wall of rock falling on all the workers
in a mine—so as to put heart in us.

His own good fortune didn’t last long. He had some fine
strapping lads at this time, and before long he would have
been able to do what he pleased if things had gone well
with them, with no trouble in the world but to issue orders
to them. A little while after my trouble he came in to me
and I suspected nothing.

‘Something’s brought you now,’ said I to him.

‘Misfortune has brought me,’ said he.

‘What is it?’ said I to him, for I was impatient for him to
speak.

‘It is this,’ said he: ‘late last evening the best of my lads
was running after a sheep and he stumbled as he ran, and
fell, too, and a sharp rock hit him on the brow, and he lost
a great deal of blood. It isn’t so much the size of the cut,
but there is a deep hole in his head, and I fancy that a piece
of the bone inside is broken.’

‘And what are you to do now?” I said.

‘I want the priest and the doctor,’ said he. ‘As the day is
fine, get yourself ready.’

‘I'll be with you in a minute,’ said I to him. ‘Get the
rest of the crew.’

When we got to Dunquin, two had to go for the priest
and two others took the road to Dingle. Diarmid himself
and his brother Liam went that way. I and Pats Heamish
went for the priest. They had ten miles to go, and I promise
you they had to go and return on foot, without a horse or
a foal.

When we reached the priests’ house they were out, and
we had to wait quietly until they returned; we spent a lot
of the day there. The parish priest asked us if the case was
dangerous, and we said it was. It was settled that the
young priest should come with us. We started off before
him, and we took all there was in them out of our legs, for
we knew that the priest would be before us, do the best we
could, though we were taking a short cut.

When we reached the harbour at Dunquin, the doctor
hadn’t come yet. The whole day was gone by this. The
priest wasn’t kept long, however. We launched the boat,
and we were just starting when the other two appeared on
the crest of the cliff, and the doctor with them. We turned
back and took them on board. It was black night by the
time we reached the Island. To be sure, we had to go out
once more and come back again.

They saw that the boy was in danger, and the doctor
said that, if any fragment of the bone inside was broken, it


would always be troubling him. ‘But,’ said he, ‘he'll be
all right if that isn’t the case.’

That was no idle day for us, and that’s how it always is
in an island like this—grinding toil always when the time
of trouble comes.

The lad never did a profitable day’s work from that till
he went to the churchyard.
21. The Yellow Meal

THE CAPTAIN OF THE DINGLE SMACK~+ THE MEAL
PUT ABOARD: THE COASTGUARD: A DIFFICULT
PASSAGE TO THE ISLAND: BUYING THE BONHAMS

Tuat year was a hungry year in the Island, and in many
other places, too, and a gentleman set out from the capital
of Ireland to find out where the scarcity was, and he came
as far as the Blasket. He sent an order for meal and flour to
Dingle. We went there to fetch it.

There was an old trawler in the harbour, and she hadn’t
done a stroke of work for a long while. There was a man’s
length of seaweed growing on her—winkles, limpets, and
mussels. The old captain who had command of her was like
to be in the same case as his ship. The bristle of hair that
sprouted out of him when he was young was on him still,
undisturbed, flowing down to his breast. And you wouldn’t
believe that a single drop of water had touched him since
the days of the great famine. He wasn’t a single day less
than eighty. Some good man in Dingle advised him to earn
the pence for himself and for his crazy old galley that had
never shifted’ from the slime of the harbour for five years
past.

She was brought up level with the quay. Soon the last
load was aboard her. Then a coastguard came along the
quay and fell to talking with the captain. He asked where
was the rest of the ship’s crew. The old lad said that he
didn’t need much of a crew—two besides himself.

The King’s man was a strong, vigorous fellow, and he
was by way of being angry with him.

‘It isn’t you we ought to blame,’ says he, “but the people
that had anything to do with you, you and your devil’s
carrion of a ship; and I wouldn’t wager half a crown on its


chance of making the Island. Have a crew ready by the
time I come back, for, if you haven’t, I’ll take out of her
everything that’s in her and put it in another boat.’

The reason why the King’s man spoke so shortly to him
was that he had been intending to go along with him.
The white-haired ancient nearly spurted blood from his
nose. He turned blue instead of grey. He rushed the whole
length of the quay after the other man, but the Islanders
kept him off. When they stopped him, he shouted out like
a mad bull:

‘By the devil’s pulleys, you go on as if you had the right
to my boat. And who gave it you?’ says he to the coast-
guard.

‘Is there a man of you there from the Island who could
raise the sails to the masthead for me and go with me?’ says
he, with a wild look in his eyes.

Though the Islandets were in sore need of the meal and
flour, they were none too ready to answer him. One of
them said they had no notion of the job. He’d just said
that much when the King’s man came at a trot down the
quay with a bundle in his hand as though he had his day’s
provision put together. The white-haired man didn’t spot
him till he had jumped aboard.

‘Have you got any hands since?’ says he.

“What the hell is it to you whether I have them or not?’
says the ancient mariner.

Just then there were two peelers standing on the quay.
The coastguard ordered them to take the old fellow in
charge. He’d ruined the alms of the poor, for the water
was already leaking on to the meal, and there was no one
in charge of the old hulk to pump her or bail her. The pair
gripped the old man.

The King’s man asked our King if he would shirk going
aboard the old smack with him and some other good
fellow in his company. The King agreed, as was his way

when there was need of him—for he was both King and
mariner when the call came, as well as being just as handy
at planting potatoes and carrying manure for them; many
a time has he harnessed his old, grey, bobtailed ass when
all else in the place were in their slumbers. He got another
man to go with him.

The King came to me before they put to sea. He showed
me a box, and put it in my charge. They went aboard, and
the man there set them their tasks at once, and before long
the old tub was ready to start from the quay. Then the
King’s man shouted to the peelers, asking if the old captain
was agreeable to go with them now, though he wouldn’t
have any authority over the ship.

Though the white-haired man wasn’t too well pleased,
he knew very well that, if he wasn’t on the ship, he wouldn’t
get any pay. Sohe went aboard. The King’s man called on
another Dingle lad so that he might be with them on their
journey home. Then off they started.

The rest of us started off to trudge the way home. We
had a lot of trifles with us, and we couldn’t carry them on
our backs, so we needed a cart. We got it for seven shillings.
We threw our stuff into the cart, and_I put in the King’s
box very carefully, and never took my eyes off it till we
reached Dunquin. There were bottles in it, and nobody
was to be trusted in their neighbourhood. The King’s box
had rounded Slea Head when he was no farther than the
mouth of the Dingle Harbour, for we could see them there.

There wasn’t any wind to move the ship, even if she
had been any good, but when we had just reached the cliff
above Dunquin Harbour a stiff breeze began to blow. We
hurried up for fear that the old captain would make the
Island before us, since he’d got the wind; but we needn’t
have hurried. When we came to the Island there was no
sign of the ship. As the night drew on, people went up on
the hill to see if they could get a sight of her in the bay, and


there was a lump of something that looked like her tacking
from side to side just off Ventry Harbour.

One man from every house in the Island stayed up all
night. When the morning light came, the old hulk was to
be seen off Slea Head without a stitch of canvas on her
except a piece on each mast about half the size of a
woman’s shawl.

Well, it mattered little how she looked since they’d come
through by giving her her head and letting her drive on.
One after another the men went to their food this way and
that, to pass the time till she came to harbour.

But, as the morning went on, she never came an inch
nearer. Before long some of the men went down to the
creek brink and decided to go out to her with a boat or two,
and so they launched a canoe and a little boat, for there
were no big boats then, nor had there been for some time
past. When we got to the ship, there wasn’t a man on
board that looked like himself after the night, even the
King. It seemed that they had spent the night pumping
water out of the old trawler, and she needed it still. They'd
had to strike the mainsail for fear the old boat would split
and go down under their feet. It’s a stiff job pumping
a ship.

We tied two ropes to her, and, as the tide was with us,
before long we’d brought her to her anchorage. There
were eight tons of both meal and flour in her, a great
help to the Blasket at that time. When we fell to carrying it
home, you’d have thought the harbour was an ant-hill, for
every man had his bag on his back. When the two
Islanders left the old tub, the only crew left aboard were
the three others; we got the anchor aboard for them.

The King didn’t forget to ask after the box he’d entrusted
to me when he went on the ship; and when I told him that
it was waiting for him at home, safe and sound, he was
mighty pleased, and forgot all the troubles of the night.

« Well, if the Blasket houses had lacked food earlier on in
the year, they couldn’t say that now since the old tub had
managed to make a job of it. It’s an old saying that God’s
help is nearer than the door, and that’s no lie; all that
lashings and leavings of food had come when we least
expected it. The next thought that entered our minds was
that it would go mouldy before half of it could be con-
sumed, and that we had best find a way of getting some
good out of it while it was sound. The plan we pitched on
was to go and buy some bonhams and, when the last of
the meal was finished, to begin grumbling again.

We'd only been an hour settling on this scheme when
every man had shaved and put on clean duds, and every
canoe in the Island was at sea making for Dunquin. When
we got to the harbour on the mainland, the whole parish
was gathered waiting for us. They thought that it was a
funeral on the way, and it seemed odd to them that they
hadn’t heard tell of anybody’s death.

A relation of mine came over to me across the beach.

“Yerra, my heart! says he, ‘you must have come on
some important business since all the canoes have come out
together.’

‘It’s a great wonder you didn’t manage to ask somebody
else about that before you came to me,’ says I.

“Yerra, my heart! some of them are not above telling
you a lie. They’ve got a bit of the playboy in them, and I’d
find it hard to believe what most of them would say.’

‘We're going to buy bonhams,’ says I.

‘Holy Mary! and me thinking that the most of them
there hadn’t a bite to put in their mouths. And isn’t it a
strange thing for you to be going to buy the makings of
pigs without a penny to do it with?’ says he.

His words maddened me, for he was a mean fellow
himself, whose ways were not to my taste.

‘If that’s a tale you’ve heard, the man that heard it


isn’t up to much, though there are many of your kin in the
Island. And it seems that you hadn’t much feeling for them
when you heard that report, since you had a score or so of
bites of food yourself and never visited them to give them
a single one of those bites.’

‘You're a bit out of temper, and that isn’t often the way
with you,’ says he, and sheered off.

When we had landed the canoes, we made our way to
Dingle on foot, ten miles. The country folk were startled
when they saw every man of us buying two or three
bonhams.

‘Yerra, my heart!’ said an old woman who'd sold us
bonhams, ‘sure it’s a long way you are yet from the early
potatoes to be buying bonhams, and yet what a lot of them
they’ve bought to-day. And I have heard that some of the
Islanders haven’t a bite to eat themselves, and where have
they got help from?’

‘Och! it’s little you know of the way of the world, or
don’t you know that He who puts us on short commons at
one time gives us plenty at another time.’

We told her the whole tale.

‘Holy Mary! it’s long before other people would be
helped like that,’ says she.

‘But didn’t you get it before we did?’ says one of us.

‘How so?’ says she.

‘Because God gave you plenty of your own and left us
with little,’ and at that he left the countrywoman.

Forty-two bonhams came to the Blasket at that push.
I had two of them, and I give you my word I had enough
to do with them, and any man that had three would rather
that the third one had been drowned in the end: for from
the very day we bought the bonhams the alms failed. It was
said that an ill report of us had got about. Anyhow my two
bonhams did splendidly, and I hadn’t had them on my
hands long when I got nine pounds for them.

Any time we had pigs for market we had to spend two
or three days in Dingle with them, and, often enough, a
week in the depth of winter. I and my two pigs spent three
nights and three days in Dingle that bout, till I’d spent
half the money I got for them—and that’s the reason why
we've given them up entirely for more than twenty years
now.
22. The Wake

PREPARING A WAKE +: THE HOUSE OF THE WAKE - HOW
WE SPENT THE NIGHT: THE POET DIES: DEATH
OF MY WIFE: DANGER AT SEA IN THE
NIGHT: A FRESH TROUBLE FOR DIARMID

THERE used to be a market every Saturday in the town in
those days, and I had only just got rid of the pigs, got the
money for them, and was thinking of setting out for home
without delay, when I saw a Dunquin man coming my
way down the street with a horse and cart, the horse
foaming and sweating plenty.

As soon as I saw him stop and.start to unyoke the horse,
I went towards him to see what he had to tell. He told me
that he was fetching stuff for his mother’s wake, for she
was in the next world since midday. A woman of the village
was with him: that is one of the old customs from genera-
tion to generation. The dead woman was close kin to me,
and so I, of course, gave up any thought I had of making
the Western Island or going home.

The man who had come for the goods for the wake told
me that another cart had come in with him, and that, if
I cared to stay with them, I could have a lift on that cart;
there would only be a barrel of porter, and a trifle besides
in it. I stayed by them, for I must be at the funeral on the
morrow somehow. We had a drink or two—we two and the
man who was going to give me a lift. The other chap went
off to see if the coffin was ready, for that was what was
holding them back now. It was then that I asked the other
man about the porter, and asked was it that they were
going to have both a wedding and a wake!

‘Yerra, my friend, no! don’t you know that barrel’s for
the wake?’
GATHERING FURZE ON THE HiLL

GOING UP THE HILL FOR TURF


‘But I’ve never heard of such a thing at a wake nor ever
seen it before this,’ says I.

‘O! it’s been coming into fashion for some time now,
and, since it is so, no doubt he’ll have a barrel, too.’

Soon the two came back to us, and the coffin was ready.
Then we turned west. We didn’t go very fast, for there
were brittle things in the carts, and so it was night by the
time we got to the house in Dunquin, where the body was.
There was a good share of people gathered there by this,
and the night was beginning to fall. All our things were
taken indoors. We unyoked the horse. A lamp was burning
in the house and a candle or two. Two women jumped up
and laid hold of the candles and arranged them properly
at the end of the table.

T sat myself down near the door when I went in, but I
wasn’t left there long. The man of the house found me out
and waved his hand to an empty chair in the corner, and
told me to stick to it till somebody else should take it from
me. I was well pleased with the man of the house for look-
ing after my comfort in this way, for I had been away from
my house and my home village for days, and I was pretty
well worn out. Besides, it was no dark corner where the
chair happened to be, and, what I liked even better than
that, I could see all over the house and notice everything.

The feet of the corpse were to the fire and its head to the
door. On the other side, facing the door, was the whole set-
out. I hadn’t been in the corner long when the house
began to fill. There was a great flame of fire, a kettle on
the hook above it, two kettles at the side of it, and the
gathering was beginning—men, women, and children up
and down throughout the house. At this moment four
people were arranging the corpse finely. ‘A dress for the
journey to the other side’, as one of the women said when
they had it done.

Soon after they had sat down, four young women jumped


up and laid down a door lid across two stools, and before
long I saw all the crockery in the house put together and
arranged on the door. Soon I saw two pots for tea coming
to the edge of the ashes, two women carrying one, and one
the other. They put tea into them and filled them up with
boiling water till the two were full to the brim. The other
two women were bringing white bread till the door lid
was covered all over.

As I was casting an eye over all these preparations, I saw
a man coming up towards me from the bottom of the
house with a great white bucket running over with porter
in one of his hands, and an empty mug to hold about a
pint in the other. The first man who met him after he’d
come through the door, he shoved the mug down in the
bucket and filled it and handed it to him. He didn’t say:
“Take it away.’

Well, I knew in my corner that the whole pint wouldn’t
be long going down his gullet, for I knew the man who had
it in his hand well—a man that’d drink the stuffing out of
the saddle, and you could see the signs of his habits on him.
I kept my eyes fixed from my corner on those who were
handing out the food and drink, and I never saw anyone
give the back of his hand to the bucket or the stuff in it till
it came to where I was. I turned it down, and the man who
was sharing it out was startled. It isn’t that I like to break
a custom—TI’ve never done it—but I didn’t care for the
drink that was going round, for I’ve hardly so much as
tasted it ever.

Just then the man who could read my disposition right—
the man of the house, I mean—was at the other man’s
heels with a bottle of whisky and a glass, and he said to
him:

“Don’t you know he’s no porter drinker?’ He filled me
up a glass out of that bottle and I drank it.

I glanced over to where the candles were flaming at the -

end of the table, where were the feet of the corpse, and
there were two men there, seated on chairs, who were
busied over tobacco and pipes; and that was no pleasant
job. One of them was cutting it and bruising it, while the
other man was crumbling it small and stuffing it into the
pipes; and if I didn’t feel much more pity than jealousy
of those two, I certainly didn’t feel ‘less, for often enough
before I’d seen a good man faint at that job.

I hadn’t been thinking so long when one of them
tumbled down from the chair and fell right on the flat of
his back on top of two bouncing women who were sitting
on the floor with more than enough to do already. And the
job these two women were at was trying to get a good blast
of smoke out of two blunderbusses of pipes crammed with
fresh tobacco, and all they had to do it with was matches;
and it would take a machine a day to make all the matches
they had wasted on the job, and the pipes were still
unlighted.

When the man fell on the women, they didn’t bless him
very heartily, for the stems of the two pipes cracked and
splintered in their mouths just when they'd got them ready
with a lot of trouble, and it only wanted one more match
to crown all their labours!

When this man that fell had been lifted to his feet-—and
he doesn’t deserve to be called a man, but a wretch, for if
a decent man had been at his job, he’d have left it sooner;
but he was trying to make himself out a man, a thing not
in his power the day tobacco got the better of him—he was
like a man in a swoon. One said that a drop of water
should be thrown over him, another that he ought to be
given a taste of whisky, but I said they should give him
plenty of tobacco, maybe that’s what he wanted!

I hadn’t felt any liking for him from the moment that
I first noticed him fiddling with the tobacco; and I
knew that nobody had put the job on him, only his own


interferingness; and I told the man of the house to chuck
him down the room, that he wouldn’t get his death of it.
They lifted my rascal out of the place where he was, and
he’d only been cleared out when I heard one of the
women saying this to him:

“May the next pipes and tobacco be at your own wake!’

As she said it, she gave a glance at the other woman by
her and nudged her, but the second woman neither waked
nor stirred.

‘Devil take you, how soon you’ve collapsed!’ says she,
shaking her harder; but it was the same story. One woman
after another came where she was. Someone brought a cup
of spring water. They poured a drop over her out of a
spoon, and they saw her coming to herself bit by bit.

T had a fine view of them, as I’ve said before, from the
corner where I was placed; and, another thing, I was glad
to have that view, for this was the first wake out of the
Island that I was ever at.

There was a man sitting by me all the time, a fine,
well-spoken man, smoking away at his fine white gun of
a pipe.

‘I wonder what happened to the man who was stuffing
tobacco into the pipes,’ says he to me, ‘the man that was
overset and that I haven’t seen since?’

‘It was his own insufficiency that did for him first, for he
wasn’t capable of doing a job like that. Besides, he’d drunk
a pint bottle of whisky with the two women opposite that
he fell on top of, and one of them fainted after him.’

‘And what a sticker the woman there must be, if she had
a man’s share of the bottle,’ says I to him.

“‘She’s the one that got the bottle from the man of the
house to share it between the three of them, and I expect
half of it is in her stomach.’

‘And how disobliging they were to you though you were
on the spot! says I.

‘It’s fifteen years since as much as a drop of it went into
my body. The devil carry it from me!’ said he.

I had seen the door in the middle of the kitchen all this
time, but by the time they had these casualties cleared
tidily away (whatever hole they shoved them in for quiet}
the tea was going. There was everything there in plenty
and profusion and leave to draw on it—white bread, jam,
and tea; there was no butter there, and there never is in
houses of this kind. I wasn’t the last man to be invited to
the board, for the man of the house came to me quickly,
and took me and my chair with him, and put me where
I could get something, saying:

‘You're not like the rest. They’re beside their own home,
but you are some way from yours.’

I ate my fair share of it, but I didn’t overdo it, for I
didn’t want to make a show of myself in a place of this
kind, with a man from the east and a woman from the west
present; and, if I was cradled in an island in the midst of
the great sea, nobody ever had to complain of my awk-
wardness or ill manners. A new lot would come to the
table when one lot was done until all the company were
satisfied, and they’d chat a little till the bucket would
come round now and again.

So we spent a good part of the night; tobacco going in
plenty; some of them sending their pipes three times to the
tobacco place to be refilled; and all that before the day
lightened. About two o’clock the man next me pointed his
finger across to the other side of the house where there was
straw on the floor, and what should I see there but all the
women in the house nodding with sleep now that all their
fiddle-faddle of work was done.

At the dawn of day there was another meal going, but
the people whose houses were near didn’t take it. About
midday or one o’clock all the people were gathered for
the funeral, and when the priest came they started off


towards the churchyard. But the journey wasn’t far. Her
family burying place was in Dunquin.

That was the wake that interested me most, and the
reason was that there was drink at it—a thing I had never
seen before. There have not been many wakes since with-
out a cask or two, and I don’t think much of the practice,
for it’s the usual thing that wherever there is drink there
is horseplay, and that’s not a fit thing in a house of the
kind.

The funeral was on a Sunday, and all the Islanders who
were ashore went to it, and it was late in the evening before
we got home. I’ve often heard the old people say that a
visit to the town did them more harm than a week’s work
at home—and that was true, but this time we were a week
away because we had the pigs, though one of us used to say
that he could live there for ever.

Well, that was the end of the pigs fed on the charity meal
and of all the bonhams that were bought in one day at the
Dingle market.

‘Anyone might have known that no luck or good fortune
would follow them,’ said the poet to me one day.

‘I’m sure you will give a reason for what you say,’
said I.

‘I’m the man for it!’ says he. ‘When this meal came and
was landed below the houses, and then all the bonhams in
Dingle market were bought to eat it, that was a strange
thing,’ said the poet.

‘But you haven’t produced an explanation of what you
said just now,’ says I.

‘No, only half of it. Haven’t you ever heard that there
are two sides to a story? When the meal and those bon-
hams came to this island, it was the talk of all Kerry.
There wasn’t a man on 2 hill or on a strand, or a woman in
a street or at chapel who chattered about anything else but
the meal and the bonhams of the Island, and neither luck

nor good fortune ever attended anything that runs in
people’s talk.’

‘It’s likely that there’ll never be a pig or a bonham here
again,” said I to him.

“That’s the idea I have,’ says he.

His idea was correct, for there’s never been a pig or a
bonham in the Island since. If the young people of the
Island saw a pig or a bonham in the place, they'd go out
of their senses.

Since I’m talking of the poet, I may as well have some-
thing to say of him here. It is about thirty-three years since
Shane Dunlevy died. It was in the Island he died, after
being ill for some time. He had had enough of his life in
this world. As he said himself:

‘Of all miseries told ’tis the worst to grow old,
With no man to heed or respect you.

The poet had a great character when he was young. It’s
often I heard my mother talking of him. She was alive in
his day. He had great stuff and spirit in him—he’d leap
every dyke as he went to Mass of a Sunday; and he was
always to be remarked among the men near him for his
carriage and his character. I knew his character better
than anybody else though he was old in my day. I fancy
that his first nest—that is to say, his cradle—was in Bal-
linaraha in Dunquin. He married into the Island, a
woman of the Manning family, a marvellous woman. She
it was who finished the bailiffs and the drivers who used to
come here day after day ruining the poor, who had nothing
to live on but famine. A bailiff climbed on to the roof of
her house and started knocking it down on her and on to
her flock of feeble children. She seized a pair of new shears
and opened them—one point this way, the other that. A
stout woman and a mad woman! The bailiff never noticed
anything till he felt the point of the shears stuck right into


his behind. It wasn’t the roof of the house that came in
through the hole this time, but a spurt of his blood. That’s
the last bailiff we’ve seen.

Dunlevy was angry with the crowd that stole his sheep—
and well they earned his anger—and he had to make a
savage song' about them. He spent a part of his life in
destitution, like many another. Nobody ever had the least
thing against him; he was always a merry man. God’s
blessing be with them all!

T hadn’t been long home when my uncle Diarmid met
me, and he had a sorry story to tell me. His second son was
failing, and he had got no sleep the night before.

‘How came that?’ said I.

‘O, my dear, he was half out of his wits,’ said he.

‘But maybe it is that he’s sickening for something,’ said I.

‘I don’t know,’ said he. ‘But I’m afraid that his job’s
done.’

“Yerra, man, take it easy. How many things happen to
people and they shake them off!’

Well, he spent a day or two more without coming into
my sight.

‘Surely,’ said I to myself, ‘it’s not much out of my way to
go where they are and see how things are with them, one
with another, for he was always a good stand-by in the day
of need.’

At that thought I sprang up, and never stopped going
till I reached the house. The poor fellow was in a bad way.
I asked him was his son getting better or worse.

‘It’s increasing on him,” said he.

T was sad and sorry for my poor old uncle, for he’d often
come to me to quieten and steady me when I was in
trouble; and I had rather that it had been the death
sickness that had come upon his son, and so would he, too.

1 ‘The Blackfaced Sheep’: a satirical poem against the neighbours who
stole a sheep from him.


Death is a fine thing compared with some troubles that
hang over a poor sinner.

I went out of the door and left the poor rake—and,
though I’ve often given him that name in this book, it was
a wrong name, for he was no rake, but just the opposite.
But he was a hapless rake that morning, with all his
troubles upon him.

On the morrow of that day my uncle was with me before
I got to him. When I saw him, I knew well that he had no
good news.

‘T have no tale to tell, dear heart, but a tale of woe,’ said
he. ‘The people tell me that if he could be in the hospital
that would be the best place for him, where he’d have the
doctor. But I fancy that we can’t manage him easily in the
canoe.’

To tell the truth, the job didn’t please me too well. But
what was to be done? Isn’t the day of need the day when
you have to stand to?

We went together—four of us—to see what we had best
do, all of us pretty down in the mouth, particularly as we
had to go on the sea on a job of this kind.

Well, when a thing has to be done, you may as well get
yourself in trim to do it or give it up. We launched the best
canoe we had, and then we went towards the house where
the sick man was.

Things don’t turn out as you expect often, and so it was
in this case. You wouldn’t have thought that there was a
thing in the world troubling him all the time we were
dressing him and otherwise making him ready. He went
with us to the harbour as easily as he had ever done. Off we
started. His father sat by him in the stern of the boat, and
four of us were rowing hard to make the passage as short as
possible till we reached the harbour at Dunquin. We came
home again. The father came home next day, when he had
settled the lad in the place that had been arranged for him.


He told me that the poor Jad had never once played a trick
on him all the way.

It was only a short time till I had to suffer more trouble,
for, after all this had gone over me, my owul wife died. I was
completely upset and muddied after that, though she left
two little girls to help me, but there is no great use in the
like of them, and even if there had been, when comrades
part, the one that remains can but blunder along only too
often, and so it was with me. I had to turn my attention to
everything, and, do what I would, things would often go
wrong. My low spirits did not leave me soon this time,
though I was always struggling to shake them off day by
day, and, Heaven knows, I had but poor success in it.
Something would always be coming across me to wake my
trouble again.

The coming season was the time for taking mackerel. We
would be abroad in the night and struggling to work by
day. We were out one night, and it was a night to beat all
others. It was beginning to look dirty, too, and we had to
take shelter under the land. We hadn’t been there long
when another canoe came up to us with a load of fish in
the nets—a proof that there was fish to be had if only the
badness of the night had not prevented us from taking it.
After a bit it looked to us as though a break had come in
the bad weather, and we started out again, four canoes of
us. When we got to the place where the other people had
seen the fish, we cast out our nets, but the last mesh had
only just left the canoe when there came violent rain and
thunder and lightning so that you couldn’t distinguish east
from west.

I said to myself that we had best take in the nets again,
and nobody contradicted me. I went to the stern of the
canoe and ran and took hold of the rope. I dragged at it
till I had the net, and two of us fell to pulling it aboard,
one working at the corks and the other at the foot. Rarely

had any pair to toil so hard as we, dragging the net on
board in a gale of wind, with the sea breaking over us, and
when we had the last of it in, there wasn’t a glimpse of the
world to be had anywhere for the rain and wind.

We got out the oars, and off we went working together,
but we couldn’t do a thing, because we had to keep our
heads down, and we had to depend all the time for our
guidance on the man in the bows. He had his head turned
trying to keep his eye on the Jand, though in the end he
could see no more than we could, but had to go by guess.

At length we got back to the place we had started from,
and one of the canoes had got there first: this was the boat
that told us they had seen the fish. She had cut away her
nets so that they had only half of them on board now, but
they didn’t worry at all over the loss of the rest; they were
only too thankful to have got away in safety. For some
time we didn’t know what had happened to the other two
boats, but they, too, reached us in the end.

That was the first fright I ever had on the sea, but it
wasn’t the last. It doesn’t matter if one or two feel
frightened, for often enough some such would be terrified
when the others didn’t mind, but that night every man in
the canoes admitted that that was the worst night they had
ever struggled through.

Well, when we'd got to the creek the storm eased a little.
We talked it over, and came to the conclusion that maybe
the end of the night would be fine, and, since it was the
way of the fish to swim on the surface, we should probably
meet with a catch that would pay us for all our agony.

It was so. We acted accordingly, and left the canoes only
just up from the water and hastened home all of us and ate
some food in the middle of the night. The night was
coming on splendidly. When I’d done eating, I went out
to the landing-place, and they were coming out of the
houses, man by man, going down to the boats. Some of the


rest of the Island fishermen had been deep asleep from the
beginning of the night.

Off went our four canoes again, and we never stopped
till we’d reached that place in the sea where we had spied
the fish in the storm earlier on. We paid out the nets, and
they hadn’t been out long when you could hear the clatter
of fish as they went into the nets right to the very end. Any
boat that hadn’t her load from her own nets, got more
than it could carry from another boat, and in the upshot
we had to throw some of the fish into the sea, and some
of the nets, too. The morning ‘was coming on, and the four
canoes came into the creek brimful with all the fish they
could possibly carry. It was a lovely, calm morning, and
our four boats started off for Dingle, taking the sea
passage, for we could get an extra shilling a hundred there,
and, since we could make that much more, we said that it
would be to our advantage instead of taking it to Dunquin
and paying for cartage.

We ran up the sails, and we had a good smell of wind
with us—and that suited us very well, for our boats were
down to the gunwale. We got to the quay in the end
without wasting too much time, and one dealer bought
everything in the four boats at fifteen shillings the hundred.

It’s an old saying: “The lazy lounger doesn’t catch fish.’
We had fish, for we were no loungers, but those that were
got no fish, being asleep.

We had good purses of money now. There were over
three thousand fish in each of our boats. We went to a
house for food first, and after that to the tavern. We sang
half a dozen songs, and that was no marvel, for if there
were poor men of our kin, they weren’t us that day. We
had had enough to eat and to drink, and, more, there was
a generous chink of money in our pockets.

Before we left the town we heard the news that. the lad
from the Island was in a good way, and we were to tell his

father to fetch him; and, though it was late in the night
by the time we reached home, I didn’t go to bed without
going with my good news to my old uncle, you may be
sure,

The next day was Sunday, and I thought I should have
to go on my journeys again with my uncle, since we
couldn’t fish that night, but he had thought for me and
didn’t bother me.

Well, the lad came back to the place he had left late
that Sunday, and be sure the whole village went to meet
him. There wasn’t a thing in the world to notice or remark
in him different from any other day, and everybody said
that he was finished with his trouble.

That was nothing but guesswork, and sometimes people
guess wrong. About three months after this people began
to notice that he wasn’t keeping steady in his wits, and his
family kept an eye on him. One night when all in the
house were asleep he slipped out and couldn’t be found in
the morning. Early that morning my poor uncle came to
me, and it wasn’t the look of a joker that he had. Every-
body in the village went to look for him, but he wasn’t to
be found, dead or alive, God save us! and we had to
throw in our hand.

The Island is three miles long by the old measurement,
and the point farthest west from the houses is called the
Black Head. Two men had gone there one day on some
job or other—I fancy they were hunting—and they had
dogs. The dogs left them and went under a big rock there,
and, though the men whistled two or three times, the dogs
didn’t come. One of the men sprang down, and when he
looked under the flagstone what should be there but the
clothes and the boots of the missing man. An odd feeling
came over them, and they hastened home, hunting no
more that day.

When they got to the houses they didn’t like to go and


tell the true story to the father, but one of the lads was a
friend of mine, and they decided to come and tell me first
and leave it to me to break the news to his family. It was
nearly as bad for me as for them. Anyhow, when I came
unexpectedly on poor Diarmid, I asked him to listen,
and said:

‘He’s gone, and you have mourned him well already,
and you may as well make the best of this piece of news of
him.’

‘I will,’ said he.

T told him.

Three weeks after this his body was brought round by
the great sea. A boat from the Island came upon him and
saved it, and he is buried in Castle Point in the Great
Blasket. The blessing of God’s Grace on his soul!
23. I begin to take an Interest
in Irish

THE COMING OF MARSTRANDER~> THE MAN WHO
WASN'T DROWNED: THE GREAT BEAST -
THE SHARK

Some years before this it often happened that I would be
held prisoner now and again out on the mainland in the
winter season. In the house where I used to stay the chil-
dren were always going to school, The Irish language was
being taught in the Dunquin school in those days—as soon
as it was in any school in Ireland, I think, The children
of this house used to read tales to me all the time whenever
I happened to be in their company until I got a taste for
the business and made them give me the book, getting one
of them by turns to explain to me the difficulties that occur
in the language—marks of aspiration, marks of length, and
marks of eclipse. It didn’t take me long to get so far that
I hadn’t to depend on them to read out my tale for me
once I understood the differences. For my head was full of
it, and, if I came across a limping sentence, all I had to do
was to hunt for it in my own brain. I could find the correct
form of it without troubling anybody.

Very soon I had a book or two, and people in this island
were coming to listen to me reading the old tales to them,
and, though they themselves had a good lot of them, they
lost their taste for telling them to one another when they
compared them with the style the books put on them. It
would be long before I tired of reading them to them, for
T was red-hot to go ahead.

From this time on an odd visitor was coming to the
Island. One Sunday at the beginning of July a canoe from


Dunquin brought a gentleman to the Blasket. He was a
tall, lean, fair-complexioned, blue-eyed man. He had only
a flavouring of Irish on his tongue. He went among the
people and observed them, and in the evening he asked
some of them whether he could find a place to stay. They
told him he could, and he arranged to lodge in the King’s
house, and went back again without saying or doing
anything else.

Not much of the Monday had gone when he had all his
traps collected. He was asked what was the reason he
didn’t stay in Ballyferriter parish, and he said that there
was too much English mixed with their Irish, and that
didn’t suit him; that his business was to get the fine flower
of the speech, and that he had observed that the best Irish
was here. He asked the King who was the best man to
teach him Irish. The King explained to him that I was the
man, for I was able to read it and had fine, correct Irish
before ever I read it. He came to me at once and questioned
me. He put a book before me, ‘Niamh.’ ‘You're all right,
but have you got English?’ says he.

‘I haven’t a great deal of English, sir,’ says I to him.

‘That'll do,’ says he.

The first day we came together he gave me the style of
‘master’.

This was Carl Marstrander. He was a fine man, with the
same manner to low and high, and, methinks, that’s
always the way with so many of his sort who have great
learning. He spent five months in the Blasket. One sitting
a day we had for half that time, two or three hours every
day; but he had news that he wouldn’t have the time he’d
thought at first, and then we had to change our plan. He
put another question to me: Was it possible for me to spend
two sittings a day with him?

It was after the day’s work was done that I used to go to
him, for the nights were long at that time of year. We were
WESTERN END OF THE ISLAND, INISH NA BRO AND
INISHVICKILLAUN IN THE DISTANCE

ABOVE THE GRAVEL 5TRAND, LOOKING TOWARDS
SYBIL HEAD

fishing and I had a boat with another man, and that
wouldn’t permit me to spend any time in his company that
would interfere with the fishing. I could only have the
second sitting with him in the day-time; but, all the same,
how could I give the gentleman a refusal? I told him I’d
do my best for him. So we went at it together, and, when-
ever I came in for my dinner I would go to him, and that
wouldn’t set me back in my fishing for long. It was just
Christmas Eve when he got home after leaving us. He
sent yellow gold to me when he had got home. I haven’t
heard anything from him for many a long day.

It was about the year 1909 when the Norseman Mar-
strander was with us. It was not long after that when
Tadhg O’Ceallaigh came to us. He was a good Irish
speaker. He used to have an Irish class in the schoolhouse
for about two hours every night. I never let a night go by
that I didn’t spend with him.

It was at this very time that a letter came to me from
the Norseman, full of paper, so that I could send to him in
Norway the name of every animal on the land, of every
bird in the sky, of every fish in the sea, and of every herb
that grows; with orders that I was not to have recourse to
any book, but to spell them after my own fashion.

Well, I hadn’t too much practice in writing the language
at this time, and I tell you, my lad, I’d have needed to be
first-rate at it to spell all the names aright. I mentioned the
matter to Tadhg O’Ceallaigh.

‘OP says he, ‘we’ll help one another, and do it splen-
didly.’

He wasn’t slow to get to work, for the task delighted him
beyond anything. We used to spend part of the day at them
till we'd finished them and dispatched them overseas.

Tadhg only stayed a month.

The year after he left us fish was to be had plentifully
every night they could go after them. A half-dozen boats


from Dunquin used to come, too. They were as skilled at
sea then as they have been ever since.

Well, it was a soft, calm, moist night, and every canoe
we had put out to sea. The night went well till it was half
spent. At midnight we made the creek and landed the
boats high and dry. Every one of us went to his own house,
and we had a bite of food. Then off we started again, and
some of the boats went with us, while others whose crews
had gone to bed never went out again at all, and some of
the Dunquin boats didn’t go back home, but remained at
sea off the Blasket landing-place. The rain showed no sign
of stopping. Off went every boat of us to work, some of
them pretty far from home. As for our boat, it wasn’t far
from the land. We let go the nets, all we had in the canoe.
They were only just spread out on the sea when we heard
a noise coming our way, and what should it be but a squall.
The blast was so fierce that it flung every one of us down
off the thwart into the bottom of the canoe, and gave the
canoe itself a good shaking.

I sprang to the rope that held the nets at the stern of the
boat and fell to dragging on it till the nets were coming
towards me. Then the wind went again as fast as it had
come, and things eased off a bit. The other pair told me
to look if there was any fish in the nets, and there was one
here and there.

‘Out with them back again,’ said they, for not another
breath of wind had come all this time.

The rope was but just taut again when there came
another noise, seven times as loud as the last one, and it
left no drop of water in the sea that it didn’t lift into
the air. It shook the canoe and tossed her this way and
that.

“Be quick and jump and haul back the rope,’ cried the
pair. “There will be a storm immediately.’

‘We should have had it on board now right enough if

we'd only kept on that time,’ says I. And I sprang to the
rope at once.

Tt wasn’t in my strength to haul in the breadth of my nail
or an inch of the net. I had to face towards the stern of the
canoe and set my heels against the foot-boards, and even so
it came slow and stiff.

We got the net on board safe and sound; but there never
was weather like it by this time, what with rain and wind.
We were right to windward of the creek, making for home.
One of us was rowing and the two others steering, and,
though I had two iron thole pins in the stern, they were
bent with the strain on them.

We were dragged to safety, for we had almost been
carried past the harbour, struggle as we might. When we
reached the harbour it was high tide, and it was a spring
tide, and the place was crammed with boats as we came in,
and the creek was very narrow.

When we put our rope ashore, we heard that a canoe
had been driven east through the channel with only one
man in her, a Dunquin man; that the other two of the
crew had left him and got to land by leaping on to the rock
when they came in without bringing a rope or anything
ashore with them out of the canoe. The little canoe with
the lone man in her drove east through the channel, and
off it went through the stormy night. It was a terrible
thing. Could anything be done? But nothing could.

The gale continued blowing out of all measure through
the night, and the little canoe and the man were being
swept before the wind through Dingle Bay until milking-
time next day. Just at that point of the day he was blown
into Valencia harbour, himself and his canoe, unhurt and
undamaged. He was taken good care of there; he had
passed all alone through the storm, and they marvelled that
he had not died for very terror in the long, endless night.

When I had come home I must go out of doors again to


find out if my relations were safe at home; it was the
children that put me to that trouble, for their uncles were
on the sea, and how should they know whether they had
been caught in the storm or not? A heavy rain was still
falling unceasingly, and I had to crawl on hands and
knees from one house to the other. At the very moment
when I reached my own house the dawn was beginning
and the rain stopping. I threw off my clothes and went to
my bed, tired and weary, and soon I was dead asleep in it.

Two days after people went out from the Blasket to the
land to keen the drowned man, for there was a sort of
wake there. In the middle of the business who should come
in at the door to them but the man himself. A steamship
had brought him across to Dingle—himself, his canoe, and
his nets. The story of this happening spread through the
country, and before long somebody from the Government
came and looked at the passage. When he had gone back,
it wasn’t long till they were at work, and the work went on
till the passage was closed and raised higher than the land
all round. This was going on for a good while. I got
fifteen pounds for the work, and I only had one man’s pay,
and many a day I was not employed at all.

I was out fishing one night after the passage through
the harbour had been set right. It was a fine night, and
we had no need to go far from home. Anyhow we weren’t
getting much fish, and we rowed to the White Strand and
made a cast of the nets. We hadn’t had the nets out long
when we noticed something floundering far back in the
net. I said to the two others that there was a seal there, and
if there were any mackerel there, he wouldn’t be long about
eating them; but the pair didn’t pay much heed to what
I had to say, letting it go in at one ear and out at the other.
Soon after that the man in the bows said that there was
some devil or other in the net, for he was dragging the net
and the boat after him at full speed.

The word was hardly said when the thing in the net
went mad. It dragged the nets and the boat for about a
mile, and came near to drowning us at that effort, only
there were twenty fathoms of rope tied to the end of the
net, and I had to pay all that out down to the last bit that
I held in my hand.

All we could do then was to let him have the nets, and
that would be a great loss to a poor fisherman. The man in
the bows told me to haul on the rope again. I did so, and
we pulled a bit of the seine on board, and it was then that
we began to talk to one another! It was a bright moonlight
night, and when we saw the huge creature a bit back from
the stern of the boat, the three of us went yellow with
terror, utterly at a loss to know what we ought to do. The
man in the bows told me not to let the nets go. He'd
rather be drowned even than lose his nets.

We spent some time like this, and we had to let the net
go back and forth. The great beast had the six nets all
twisted round him except one net; and when he went
down, we had to let the rope run every time till he struck
the sand at the bottom. We were fighting him till we came
near the landing-place. I had a good knife open all the
time ready to draw it across the rope, but there would
have. been little help in that if the beast had run wild.

At last we reached the harbour, where we got help from
two other canoes. The beast was as big as the whole
harbour basin. Soon he wallowed all over the basin and
drenched all of us that were there, and clouted the rock
with his back fin. He split the rock and knocked half a ton
out of it. He came near to frightening to death all in the
harbour when he was landed. The liver in him provided
the whole island with light for five years. It was a tough
job to get the nets off him. He left us only the ropes of the
nets, all the rest was torn and rent. The three of us have
never been the same since; we'd had too great a fright; we


should have been drowned if we hadn’t been so close to the
harbour.

Another day we had the canoe anchored to a stone and
were fishing with the line. Soon a shark passed under the
boat, swimming backwards and forwards without leaving it,
and he couldn’t be driven away. One of us was lying along
the thwart, and, of course, his legs were stretching over the
gunwale. I was in the stern of the boat, and, glancing
down, what should I see but the shark with his jaws wide
open, making, belly upwards, towards the feet. I shouted
to the man in the boat’s waist to draw in his legs. He did
double quick. The shark reared up half out of the water,
and he nearly sank us with the rush of it. We had to pull
up anchor and make the land, and he followed us so long
as he had two fathoms of water. We were no good for the
rest of that day, and didn’t get our courage back again for
a week.

I’ve never seen a sea beast since floating on the surface
of the water but my heart shook. It’s often that a canoe or
a boat has been sunk in the night-time, and often in the
day, too, and the people could not make out what had
befallen them. It is my belief that it is a monster of this
kind that attacks them and overturns them. There’s many
a danger lying in wait for those that follow the sea.
24. This and That

THE TENT ON THE MAINLAND: THE INQUISITIVE
OLD MAN*+ THE LAND UNDER THE BOARD: THE
BUILDING OF THE NEW HOUSES:* THE GANGER

THAT DIDN’T KNOW IRISH * RELIGION « STUDENTS
OF IRISH COME TO ME‘ THE GREAT WAR AND

THE WRECK

ONE morning people were out early in this island, and
what should there be to look at but a great, white tent on
the cliff above the harbour in Dunquin. It seemed curious
to us, although the landlord had been often threatening us
before this. Some of us said that it was the bailiffs, others
said no. Whatever the white house there on the land meant,
none of us had much fancy for going out. Some of us were
near to starving for lack of provisions.

There came a very fine day, and a middle-aged man who
had a canoe of his own that wasn’t an outsize said that
he would go out if two lads would go with him. I told him
he’d do better to stop at home, and that it was no good
thing that was on the mainland. It wasno use being at him
since he’d got the idea into his head. He found the lads
and started off across the Sound. He was a vainglorious,
little fellow, with a bush, like a buck goat’s, under his chin.

He never stopped or cooled till he struck Dunquin
harbour. My man hurried up to view the tent, and found
out at once that it was an army of invasion against the
Blasket. He wasn’t satisfied without seeing what sort of men
it was who were in the white house. He went to where he
could see the door opening, and caught sight of a gun or
two. There was a man like himself in the tent, with a goat’s
beard like his own, and he saw that the man outside was
a cheeky fellow from the way he was peering at him


through the door, noticing everything. All he did was to
snatch up his gun and point it at him.

When the man outside saw what he was at, he bolted
from the white house and faced for the harbour, where he
had his little canoe. The grey man with the gun followed
him for a bit of fun, and he fired a shot to put the fear of
death in his heart.

The islandman called the two lads to the canoe. They
dragged it down after them from high-tide mark down to
low-tide mark. They hadn’t been long afloat when the lads
noticed the sea-water welling up round their knees, and
they screamed out that they were drowned!

Though they weren’t far from the land, the old man
wouldn’t let them turn back for fear of the grey man with
the gun. He shoved his vest into the hole the water was
coming through, and set a boy to bail her until they
reached their own harbour.

I happened to be waiting for them there. I asked the old
man to give some account of what was on the land, but it
was a surly answer I got: “There they are for you. Go and
see for yourself.’

‘I told you not to go,’ said I to him, ‘for you’re no good
at home or abroad.’ I lifted my fist and fetched him a clout
in the ear-hole.

Td given good advice to the rascal when he was setting
out in the morning, and now it was the worst word in his
mouth that he had for me when he got back. This wasn’t
the first time either that such a thing happened, and yousee
it made me so angry that I lifted my fist to him, the only
time in the world that I ever did it to anybody. But the
grey man with the gun put such a fright into him that he
was never the same man again. When his tale about the
bailiffs came to the ears of the Islanders, it worried us a lot.
The most that lived there in those days were bitter poor.
We were in a trap then, for we couldn’t go ashore at all.

When the parish priest heard of it, he didn’t like it, and
he didn’t rest till he could find out if there was any way of
setting us free. The Congested Districts Board had been
taking up estates in the countryside for some time before
this. The priest made inquiries to see whether he could
bring the Blasket under the Board. He was told that they
were willing to take it on, and he sent a message to us to
come out to him at once, for an officer of the Board would
be with him on the day he had fixed. The day appointed
was too stormy and we couldn’t go to our usual harbour,
but had to put in to Cuas an Reha. The pair were waiting
for us with their backs against a rock.

We talked with them for a bit, and they with us, till
they made it clear to us that we should never see the white
house again, and, after we’d gone through a lot of explana-
tions, we said farewell to one another. It wasn’t a very
good day on the sea for us, and though they were on dry
land, it didn’t deserve a word of praise from them either,
for snow showers out of the north-west were blinding both
of them and their horses. When we got to the Island, the
whole population was down by the water waiting to see
what news we had for them. We had good news, and gave
it them with joy.

The next day the white house was down, and before long
one man after another came to visit us from the Board. ’Tis
an old saying that ‘God’s help is nearer than the door’,
also that ‘the thing a man likes least in the world may be,
for all he knows, the very heart of his fortune’. So it was
with us in this matter of the white house. However hard
our masters may be after us sometimes, the Great Master
of all often sends them to the rightabout.

Before long the officer of the Board came. He put up
a tent and spent some time among us measuring and
apportioning the land. It was I who held the other end of
the chain for him. He wrote down our names as tenants


under the Board, and we were to be content with this and
that. He brought a foreman with him and a lot of materials
in a trawler from Dingle, and put a great deal of work in
train. When he’d got everything arranged for the ganger,
he left him in charge of the whole affair, meaning to pay
visits to us himself now and again. A man used to come
to pay wages once a fortnight.

The Board spent a year and a half working in the
Blasket, and most of the men in the village were at work
every week and every day. Two shillings a day was our
pay—pretty good when we were working for ourselves.

Seventeen shillings a year was the rent on my holding,
and still is, while my grandfather in the old days used to
pay ten pounds. That’s a great change in the world.

Five new houses were built in the Island. I and the
ganger put up every inch of them, and often the two of us
had to work desperately hard. We used a contraption of
wooden boards for them, for they are built of mixed gravel
and cement, and we had to keep them as straight as a gun
barrel. Before they were finished that ganger was called
away and he had to go, and another man came who hadn’t
the least notion of building houses. I had to finish them.

Among other misfortunes, this new ganger didn’t under-
stand a word of Irish. A day came when a floor was to be
laid in one of the new houses, and there were four men
working on a wooden platform mixing the mortar. The
ganger wanted to give them an order to mix so much
cement with so much gravel. The men mixing the mortar
had no English and the ganger no Irish, and that made a
mess of the work, and they fell out with one another. I was
up under the slates plastering. Before long I saw him
coming towards me in a bad temper.

‘Come down here,’ says he. “These four at the board are
as stupid as four asses.’

I came down a great, long ladder and went to the

platform, and found out the cause of the muddle. I told
them what the ganger wanted done. The ganger was
cursing away.

‘Those are the four stupidest men I ever saw,’ says he,
‘and I’ll have to discharge them.’

‘But this is what the four say,’ said I, ‘that if the Board
wants these houses finished, you’ll have to be discharged
and somebody put in your place who can make himself
understood. A man like you can be no use here.’

The ganger never had so much to say after that as before.
I fancy he realized that it was with him the fault lay.

The Board improved our holdings so that every man
knows his own plot and has it fenced so that he can do his
sowing in a part of it whenever he likes. It wasn’t so with
us before: unless your next neighbour was ready to sow
with you, you had to stop, for you couldn’t fence your plot;
every man’s allotment for sowing was too small.

We've never had any distraint for rent since that time,
but I’m afraid it won’t be so for ever. We are getting
poorer every day.

When the land was all tidily settled by the Board and
every man had his own field here and there, trimly fenced,
there was nothing to prevent us sowing all we wanted, and
we used to do that, and more. Before the Board came we
hadn’t proper fencing for these little fields, and in the little
bits of land we did sow—often enough with good potatoes
—-we used to have pigs and asses, and they’d often make an
utter mess of them after all our labour. Many a year I’ve
spent in which I had to do a man’s part in the day-time
after being up all night, about All Souls’ Day, after
mackerel; and often enough I’ve spent a whole week
without sleep till I had my potatoes in store. Now, when
we had our gardens all ship-shape, so that neither deer nor
eagle could go into them, nothing could tire us of sowing
and reaping.


At this time there rose up a babbler amongst us, and his
idea was to have food without sweat. He stuck his hands
under his oxters. As happens with every villainy, it wasn’t
long till first one and then a pair of lads did as he did, and
many of them started to take their ease. This ill-conditioned
rascal told them that it was the same food one would get
after all, and that only horses and fools worked in this
world.

First one field, then two, and then three, went to ruin,
and remained fallow without a thing planted in them. The
man that started this rascality went to America, and he
didn’t find bread growing on the hedges there. We've
never been so keen on planting since as we were at first,
and the walls that the Board set up to fence the fields are
beginning to fall.

One day I was fetching a load of turf on the hill, and
what should I see but a trawler from Dingle sailing east on
the south side of the Island. She had every sail in her set,
and a strong gale was blowing out of the north. A fierce
gust swept down the hill-side and I heard the clatter
coming my way, but I gave no heed to it.

When it struck the ass that was just in front of me, it
stripped the baskets off him and knocked him flat, and me,
too, and drove all the wits out of my head. I sprang up and
looked round me, but I couldn’t find the baskets, though
I found the ass. I looked after the baskets and saw the
trawler, and was amazed when I saw no sails on her—only
rags and tatters. The gust had swept them clean away. She
lay there like a fool, never moving.

I looked closely and saw my baskets floating out in the
great sea about twenty yards from the trawler that was
stripped of her sails.

I stood a few minutes to think what I had best do. There
wasn’t a sod of turf in the house or anything to cook a
thing, and my creels were gone! The plan I hit on was to

take the two bags out of the ass’s packstraddle and put the
turf in them, one of them on either side of him.

In the matter of religious service, so far as my memory
goes back, we had endless trouble. We must go across the
Sound to Mass, three long miles to Dunquin. In winter the
Sound is rarely fit for it, and we were forced, and still are,
to stay at home. We were often a whole quarter without
a Mass. Any Sunday we couldn’t go out we used to say the
rosary at the time when the Mass was being celebrated
on the land.

As regards Confession, it’s only a man here and there
that would go out to Dunquin for it, so long as I can recall,
but the priests came into the Island once a year. A big
boat from Dunquin was appointed by the parish priest to
bring them in, and he used to give them all the money that
was collected for himself at the Station. That’s how it used
to be till these big boats went out of use and there were
none of them remaining in the Island or out. Canoes from
the Island bring them in ever since then.

Not half the respect is paid to the priests now that was
paid in the days of my youth. When I was a boy, I
remember well nobody was considered to have welcomed
the priest properly who didn’t put one knee to the ground
after sweeping his cap right off his head. In the world of
to-day if there is a gathering to meet the priest, those in
front will doff their caps, but maybe not another cap will
be doffed from there to the back. No woman was allowed
to go in a boat with a priest in it, whatever her haste or
need, and never one of them came near the landing-place.
But, for some time now, there’s none to say them nay if
the boat is crammed with them.

One of the oldest recollections I have is seeing the bishop
in the Blasket. I fancy the reason I took such note of him
beyond anyone else was that he had a special mantle on,
for I can’t have been many years old. If anyone wants to


know exactly where the episcopal seat is on the Blasket, it
wouldn’t take me long to put my finger on it. He went
walking on after leaving the landing-place till he came to
a green-grassed place. There was a rock in the middle of
this place. The bishop stopped and looked about him and
sat down on the rock, gathering his cloak about him.
‘This place is just right, since the day is fine,’ says he.

I don’t remember any bishop coming since then. Once
every three years for some time past the young folk are
summoned to go out to the place where the parish priest
lives in Ballyferriter to be confirmed by the bishop. A
house used to be prepared in the Island forthe Stationsevery
year when they came; but so long as the school has been
here they are held in it.

Many people have been coming to the Island for years
in quest of Irish. Most of them spent a month here. I had
to spend a time in the company of each one of them, and
do my own work into the bargain. A man came to this
Island, and he’s come a good deal since. ‘Blaithin’ is what
we call him. He is Robin Flower from London. He had
heard from Carl Marstrander before he came that he had
been with me. When this good fellow got to Ireland, he
never rested till he reached the Great Blasket. He’s been
coming every year since. We used to spend the time to-
gether writing. We had two sittings every day at it. He
spent some time every year in my company to get every
word we had written arranged in order till it was right and
easy. That book will tell of every disaster that befell round
the Blaskets, both the little and the big: the strait that
trapped some of the men, how some of them dwelt for a
time in the little islands, how they fared in them, the
wrecked ship, the fairy cry, and other apparitions that
were to be seen often and often, if report speaks true of
them.

The daughter I had—the one that survived that day on

the White Strand—had a relation in Dunmore, and this
woman wanted her living near her. She married in Dun-
more and had a good place there. Her going made a great
gap for me. I had nobody then to look after things for me,
but we were left to blunder on, dragging the world after
us. I was but a dark, dispirited dullard after my daughter
left me. A dozen years she lived in Dunmore after that.
She left six young children behind her. Whatever sorrow
else befell me, that sorrow of the grave was the crown of
them all.

The Great War hadn’t been going on for long when
ships were being wrecked and destroyed on the ocean and
strangers were coming in open boats from every quarter of
the sea. The only person I had in the house with me at that
time was my brother Pats, who was twelve years older than
I was. He had his pension then.

There’s no telling of all the goods that were adrift on
the surface of the sea while the war was going on. Two
miles from the harbour here a great ship ran upon the
rocks. The Quebra she was called. Her captain said that
she had in her cargo everything that feeds mankind except
drink. And he was right. The sea filled up with everything
eye had ever seen and that we had never seen in this place.
Hundreds of pounds’ worth was salvaged from the wreck,
and the Islanders made a great deal of money out of her,
though they didn’t get what they ought.

I had nothing to do but to watch them, to be sure, for I
went neither in boat nor in bark, and nobody invited me.

While the Great War was on Brian O’Ceallaigh came
to me. He spent a year with us, and he was in our com-
pany for Christmas that year. When he had gone, I used
tosend him ajournal every day for five years. Then nothing
would satisfy him but that I should write of my own life and
tell him how I had passed my days.

It was never my way to refuse anybody, so I set about


the job. What you’re reading now, reader, is the fruit of
my labours. I was putting the world past me like this for
some time more; people coming in ones and twos and
threes, and every one of them having his own sittings with
me.

The Gaelic League had been founded five years when I
put my head into it, and, however hard I’d worked, I’ve
been working harder year by year, and to-day I go harder
at it than ever for the sake of the language of our country
and of our ancestors.

Father Clune came and spent three weeks with me. He
said Mass for us every day. He came back again, and I was
a month in his company. We helped one another, correcting
all the words in ‘Réilthini Oir’. We used to be sitting at it
eight hours a day in two sessions—four hours in the morn-
ing and four in the afternoon—for all that month, That’s
the most painful month’s work I ever did, on land or sea.

One of my sons had been in America for twelve years.
He came home about this time, himself and his wife and
two children. He was on the same ship as Archbishop
Mannix when he was taken out of the ship. He only stayed
with me half a year when he started across the water again
and left me. There was no fishing or anything when they
came, but they spent the pound or two that they had
brought with them, and what he said was that, if things
went on as they were going much longer, he’d have spent
every penny he brought with him, or that might be coming
to him, and that he’d have nothing left at home or abroad.
And I think he was right! My brother, the old pensioner,
left me when they came home. He was received into a
house in Dunquin, and is still there, in his eightieth year.

T have another young son with me, and he has to stay
around the house, for there is little good in me except in
my tongue. We have neither cow nor horse, sheep nor
lamb, canoe nor boat. We have a handful of potatoes and

a fire. I have been twenty-seven years hard at work on
this language, and it is seventeen years since the Norseman,
Marstrander, came my way. Something or other comes to
me now and again, one thing after another, that keeps me
from starvation. I hear many an idle fellow saying that
there’s no use in our native tongue; but that hasn’t been

my experience. Only for it I should have been begging
my bread!
25. The End

WELL, I’ve slipped along thus far to the end of my story.
I have set down nothing but the truth; I had no need of
invention, for I had plenty of time, and have still a good
deal in my head. It’s amazing what a lot there is in an old
man’s head when somebody else starts him talking and
puts questions to him. All the same, what I’ve written
down are the things that meant most to me. I considered
the whole course of my life, and the things that had meant
most to me were the first to come back to memory.

I have brought other people besides myselfinto my story,
for, if I hadn’t, it would have been neither interesting nor
complete. I never disliked any of them, and I’ve spent my
life in their company till to-day without any trouble
between us. I don’t know what colour the inside walls of
the court in Dingle are, old though I am.

We are poor, simple people, living from hand to mouth.
I fancy we should have been no better off if we had been
misers. We were apt and willing to live, without repining,
the life the Blessed Master made for us, often and again
ploughing the sea with only our hope in God to bring us
through. We had characters of our own, each different
from the other, and all different from the landsmen; and
we had our own little failings, too. I have made no secret
of our good traits or of our little failings either, but I
haven’t told all the hardships and the agonies that befell
us from time to time when our only resource was to go
right on.

This is a crag in the midst of the great sea, and again
and again the blown surf drives right over it before the
violence of the wind, so that you daren’t put your head out
any more than a rabbit that crouches in his burrow in

Tnishvickillaun when the rain and the salt spume are
flying. Often would we put to sea at the dawn of day when
the weather was decent enough, and by the day’s end our
people on land would be keening us, so much had the
weather changed for the worse. It was our business to be
out in the night, and the misery of that sort of fishing is
beyond telling. I count it the worst of all trades. Often and
again the sea would drive over us so that we could see the
land no more—a long, long night of cold like this, strug-
gling against the sea, with often little to get, only praying
from moment to moment for the help of God. It was rare,
indeed, for us to get a full catch, and then often we would
have to cut away the nets and let it all go with the sea.
On other nights, after all the labour of the fishing, the
boats would be fairly full, and we couldn’t make the
harbour or the land, but the swell would be rising to
the green grass, the storm blowing out of the north-west,
and the great waves breaking. We would have to flee
then before the gale, some of us to Cuan Croumha, some
to Ventry harbour, some to Dingle.

You may understand from this that we are not to be put
in comparison with the people of the great cities or of the
soft and level lands. If we deserved blame a little at times,
it would be when a drop of drink was going round among
us. The drink went to our heads the easier because we were
always worn and weary, as I have described, like a tired
horse, with never any rest or intermission.

It was a good life in those days. Shilling came on shil-
ling’s heels; food was plentiful, and things were cheap.
Drink was cheap, too. It wasn’t thirst for the drink that
made us want to go where it was, but only the need to have
a merry night instead of the misery that we knew only too
well before. What the drop of drink did to us was to lift
up the hearts in us, and we would spend a day and a night
ever and again in company together when we got the


chance. That’s all gone by now, and the high heart and the
fun are passing from the world. Then we’d take the home-
ward way together easy and friendly after all our revelry,
like the children of one mother, none doing hurt or harm
to his fellow.

I have written minutely of much that we did, for it was
my wish that somewhere there should be a memorial of it
all, and I have done my best to set down the character of
the people about me so that some record of us might live
after us, for the like of us will never be again.

I am old now. Many a thing has happened to me in the
running of my days until now. People have come into the
world around me and have gone again. There are only
five older than me alive in the Island. They have the
pension. I have only two months to go till that date—a
date I have no fancy for. In my eyes it is a warning that
death is coming, though there are many people who would
rather be old with the pension than young without it.

I can remember being at my mother’s breast. She would
carry me up on to the hill in a creel she had for bringing
home the turf. When the creel was full of turf, she would
come back with me under her arm. I remember being a
boy; I remember being a young man; I remember the
bloom of my vigour and my strength. I have known
famine and plenty, fortune and ill-fortune, in my life-days
till to-day. They are great teachers for one that marks
them well.

One day there will be none left in the Blasket of all I
have mentioned in this book—and none to remember them.
I am thankful to God, who has given me the chance to
preserve from forgetfulness those days that I have seen
with my own eyes and have borne their burden, and that
when I am gone men will know what life was like in my
time and the neighbours that lived with me.

Since the first fire was kindled in this island none has

written of his life and his world. I am proud to set down
my story and the story of my neighbours. This writing
will tell how the Islanders lived in the old days. My mother
used to go carrying turf when I was eighteen years of age.
She did it that I might go to school, for rarely did we get
a chance of schooling. I hope in God that she and my
father will inherit the Blessed Kingdom; and that I and
every reader of this book after me will meet them in the
Island of Paradise.

THE GREAT BLASKET
1926
